abhorrent/
aberrant

Abhorrent describes something truly horrible like finding a dead rat in your soup, but something aberrant is just abnormal, like a cat in a pink fedora.

Abhorrent means disgusting or detestable. When you abhor something, you loathe it. Its Latin root means, "to shudder, recoil," which is what you do when faced with something abhorrent like a zombie, or in these examples:  

She said sanitary conditions in the emergency room were abhorrent. (Seattle Times)

If I thought monarchy abhorrent, for example, I would not seek British citizenship. (Washington Times)

Aberrant (no "h") means unusual, straying from a defined path. It's not necessarily nasty. It's from the Latin, aberrantem, "wandering away." It's related to err, a mistake, through Old French and Latin. If a behavior is aberrant, it's just not normal:

Weeks ago the nation witnessed the culmination of aberrant fan behavior when Bryan Stow was beaten in the Dodger Stadium parking lot. (Newsweek)

Upstairs the show gives way to delicious aberrant moments, like the gallery kitted out in beige walls and chunky red molding. (New York Times)

If you can remember that the err in aberrant indicates an error and that you abhor something that is abhorrent, your word choice will be neither aberrant nor abhorrent. Wearing a feather boa to a funeral? Aberrant. Stealing the body? Abhorrent.

Use the adjective aberrant to describe unusual conduct. Sitting in a bathtub and singing show tunes all day long might be considered aberrant behavior. Continue reading...

Many people find cruelty toward animals abhorrent, that is, they think it's detestable, obscene, repugnant, repulsive, and offensive to the mind. In other words, they really, really don't like it. Continue reading...



accept/
except


  To accept is to receive, and except is to exclude, usually. Both are  busy little words skipping around to different meanings, but they never run  into each other.


  To accept is to receive something like tea, an idea, or a  student into your college:


      He accepted tea from Annette without looking at her. (Mary Cholmondeley)

Comments are accepted for a month before  guidance is adopted. (Seattle Times)


      Mary J. Blige Says She's Been Accepted To  Howard University, Howard Disagrees (Huffington  Post)


  It's  difficult to find accept used incorrectly. Score one for English  speakers! It's accept's nemesis, except, that poses problems. Except usually means "unless" or "excluding," but it's sometimes used as verb "to  leave out." Read all the examples below except the ones you don't like:


      He  defined solitary confinement as an inmate being held in isolation from all except guards for at least 22 hours a day. (Reuters)


      Quiet,  benign, his gestures small but eloquent, he barely talks except about the  music. (New York Times)


      But thickness excepted, he made about the same  figure in the street next day. (Bjørnstjerne Bjørnson)


  It's  the verb form that confuses, and it's usually except when accept is wanted. So remember: to accept is to receive or believe something,  but to except is to leave out. Accept something by giving it an A, or exclude it with a big fat X for except.

Please accept ("favorably receive") our apologies, but you're just going to have to accept ("put up with") the fact that this verb has almost a dozen different meanings. Continue reading...

The preposition except means "excluding." When we refer to the continental United States, we mean the whole country except Alaska and Hawaii. Continue reading...



ado/
adieu

An ado is a fuss, and adieu is French for farewell. They sound similar but aren't exactly twins. Ado sounds like "uh-doo" and adieu is like "a-dyoo," you know, in a cool French accent.

Shakespeare wrote Much Ado About Nothing, and that's still the way you'll often hear the word. It's usually found in that phrase or "without further ado." An ado is an unnecessary hustle-bustle. Check it out:

"Alas, the rhino in question withstood my volley of bullets and then trampled me without much ado." (Washington Post)

"And now, without further ado, let's count down the top ten worst Christmas movie flops of all time!" (Forbes)

Adieu is French for goodbye, but English borrows it. Au revoir is also French for goodbye, but that's more of a "see ya later" while adieu is more like "farewell forever." Adieu comes from "a dieu" which means "to god." You say that to someone if you think it's the last time you'll see her alive, or even if it just seems that way. You can also bid something adieu. Voila:

"So it is with a heavy heart that I must bid the pen adieu." (New York Times)

"In French, people say 'Au Revoir' to say 'See you again', but when they say 'Adieu' - well, that's like saying, 'We'll never see you again.'" (BBC)

Say goodbye to getting them mixed up. Ado is like "to-do," and adieu is a dramatic farewell, what you might say to someone if they're about to die — see the word "die" in adieu. And now without further ado, bid this explanation adieu.

Adieu is a French word meaning "goodbye" that is commonly used in English, especially in the phrase "I bid you adieu!" Continue reading...

Someone who makes a lot of ado about things has a tendency to make them more busy or complicated than they need to be. Continue reading...



adopt/
adapt


  "Adopt, adapt, and  improve," says the thief in a Monty Python skit when he robs a  lingerie shop instead of a bank. Adopt is to take something over, and to adapt is to change something to suit your needs. It's helpful advice  when you ask for money and get a pair of granny panties. 


The robber didn't invent the  motto, it's from the Round Table Club, and it comes from a speech made by the  Prince of Wales in 1927. The full quote is:


    The young business and professional men of this country must get  together round the table, adopt methods that have proved so sound in the  past, adapt them to the changing needs of the times and wherever  possible, improve them. 


The prince was encouraging the  new generation of businessmen to take on, or adopt, methods that had  worked before. Adopt means to take on as one's own, like an idea, an  attitude, or behavior, or even, of course, a creature like a baby or a dog:


    All this  strengthens my conviction that Europe must adopt strict and rigorous  rules, including but not limited to the rating agencies," he said. (Wall  Street Journal)


    Two months ago, I  turned down the opportunity to search for my adopted daughter's birth  parents. (New York Times)


  ‎But  the prince wanted Britain's industries to go further and adapt those methods to  current conditions. Adapt means to change something to fit new  situations, to modify:


    One wonderful  thing the English language can do is adapt. (Forbes)

 "But  obviously that military presence can adapt over time, taking into  account the development in the overall security environment," he said. (Reuters)


  Remember, if you mean to rob a  bank but wind up at an underwear store: adopt, adapt, and  improve!

Say you move to a country where everyone cooks with lots of hot peppers.  At first the food scalds your tongue, but over time you adapt — you change in a way that allows you to deal with the new circumstances. Continue reading...

You can adopt an air of nonchalance, a fake British accent, or even a stray dog. When you adopt something, you consciously select it and accept it as your own. Continue reading...



adverse/
averse

Adverse and averse are both turn-offs, but adverse is something harmful, and averse is a strong feeling of dislike. Rainstorms can cause adverse conditions, and many people are averse to rain. 

Adverse describes something that works against you, like a tornado or a computer crash, and is usually applied to things. It's often followed by the word effects:

More significantly, he has shown that if such ageing cells are selectively destroyed, these adverse effects go away. (Economist)

The pact was intended to limit the adverse effects of climate change but only obliged developed countries to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. (Scientific American)

Averse is usually applied to feelings, attitudes, or people. It's a strong feeling of opposition — it's a big "no thanks" and it's often followed by to. Averse also goes with risk to describe people (or banks) who don't like taking them:

Balth isn't averse to including human beings in his work. (Seattle Times)

Nevertheless, Ms. Fishbein is not averse to a large sociable gathering. (New York Times)

Your survey shows that banks are more risk-averse than they used to be. (Business Week)

If it's a force of nature working against you, use adverse. Kick out the "d" and a person can be averse to or against anything, like rainy days or gambling.

Steer clear of anything adverse. If it's adverse, it's working against you — like adverse weather conditions or the adverse effects of eating too much sugar. Continue reading...

To be averse to something is to be opposed to it on moral, philosophical or aesthetic grounds: my father is averse to people smoking cigarettes in the house, but he would not be averse to your smoking a cigar. Continue reading...



affect/
effect

Choosing between affect and effect can be scary. Think of Edgar Allan Poe and his RAVEN: Remember Affect Verb Effect Noun. You can't affect the creepy poem by reading it, but you can enjoy the effect of a talking bird.

In everyday speech, affect is a verb. It means to influence something, such as in the headline from the Albuquerque News,

Downed Power Line Affects PNM Customers

The downed power line had an impact on some power customers: they were without electricity overnight.

Effect is most commonly used as a noun meaning the result or impact of something, an outcome. If there's "a/an/the" in front of it, it's an effect. The second sentence is from a story about the outcome of long-term sleeping trouble,

The Effect of Persistent Sleepiness

Adding to the confusion, effect can also be used as a verb to mean to produce or to cause to come into being. Here's an example that uses it correctly,

A government unable to effect any change is a government that will produce no surprises.

Put another way, a government that can't produce change won't be able to produce surprises; it will be predictable.

Most of the time, you'll want affect as a verb meaning to influence something and effect for the something that was influenced. The difference between affect and effect is so slippery that people have started using "impact" as a verb instead. Don't be one of them! Another trick is to remember that affect comes first alphabetically, and an action (to affect) has to occur before you can have a result (an effect).

Affect is most often used as a verb meaning “to have an impact on,” as in “The tornado barreling towards us will affect our picnic plans.” Continue reading...

Effect is the result of an action, as in those “cause and effect” papers you might write in English class. Your topic could be how your late-night tuba playing (cause) has driven your roommate insane (effect). Continue reading...



afflict/
inflict


  Both afflict and inflict cause pain,  but afflict means to cause suffering or unhappiness, something a disease does, but inflict means to force pain or suffering, like if you smack someone upside  the head.


  If  something afflicts you, it hurts.  Cancer, death, arthritis, or even bad skin can afflict you. Afflict is  often, but not always, followed by the preposition with:


      It's also quite likely that he was afflicted with an eating disorder. (Slate)


      He has never publicly revealed what type of cancer afflicted him. (New York Times)


      In the proud tradition of genuine watchdog  journalism, Khalil Bendib's work aims to comfort the afflicted and afflict the  comfortable. (Brunei Times)


Inflict is meaner. It's more aggressive  — it actively hurts and causes problems. A self-inflicted wound is when you hurt yourself. Inflict is often, but not always, followed by on:


      Some participants in the debate said the rule could  unintentionally inflict economic harm on Africans. (Washington Post)


      Five other men accused of taking part in the fight  were convicted of hooliganism and inflicting light bodily injury. (Seattle Times)


      Most injuries are self-inflicted; they're not necessarily inflicted by others.  (New York Times)


  The  difference between the two is whether the emphasis is on the one suffering or  the one causing the suffering. Afflict emphasizes who is doing the suffering. Inflict emphasizes the person or thing causing the suffering. Try this: I am afflicted with something terrible,  so I inflict injuries upon others.

To afflict is to cause suffering, pain, or misery. It’s often associated with medical conditions. Carpal Tunnel Syndrome is most likely to afflict someone who spends many hours every day typing on our computers. Continue reading...

When you force an undesirable or harmful event on someone, you inflict it on them. You might prefer that someone inflict some physical pain on you rather than inflict you with the boredom of another trip to the annual flower show. Continue reading...



aggravate/
irritate


Aggravate means to make  something worse, and irritate is to annoy. But if you use aggravate to mean "annoy," no one will notice. That battle has been lost in all but the  most formal writing.

To aggravate is to make something go from bad to worse. Yet aggravate was first listed as meaning, "exasperate, annoy" in A Dictionarie  of the French and English Tongues by Randal Cotgrave in 1611. But it's not  exactly the same as irritate, darn it, and the sentences below get it  right. In the news, aggravated often goes with battery, which is  worse than simple battery (beating someone up), and carries a tougher  punishment:


    Knight was arrested for aggravated battery and resisting a  police officer. (Chicago Tribune)


    Tapia, 27, was charged after the confrontation with several counts  of aggravated battery on a police officer and resisting arrest. (Reuters)


    Regardless of pH levels, high-fat meats, dairy products, caffeine,  chocolate, carbonated beverages, fried foods, alcohol and mints are known to aggravate reflux symptoms. (New York Times)


Irritate means to annoy someone. If you try to use irritate in the  sentences above, it doesn't work as well. Irritate also means to inflame  a part of the body, and in that sense, aggravate won't do:


     Bedbugs don't  spread disease, but they can irritate skin. (WebMD)


    Gold chains are also very irritating to the neck and arms of an  infant. (Eliza Leslie)

Despite four hundred years of  English speakers using aggravate to mean annoy or irritate, there  is a shade of difference. If you make something worse, you aggravate the  situation. A bedbug will irritate your skin. If you're determined to annoy,  use either. 

People who chew with their mouths open often aggravate the people near them, meaning that they exasperate their neighbors. Continue reading...

To irritate is to cause an unsettling reaction, whether it's of the body or the nerves. You can irritate someone by talking too loudly on your cellphone in public. You can also irritate your skin, causing a rash or redness. Continue reading...



allude/
elude


Allude is coy, to allude is to refer to something in an indirect manner. But elude's favorite thing to do is hide from the cops; it means to  evade. Because the accent is on the second syllable in both words, it's easy to  get them mixed up. 


  To allude is to talk  around something, give hints, and generally not say what you really want to  say. You allude to something when you  don't want to say it outright: 


        In fact, McCarthy alluded to Williams  as being an afterthought in Green Bay's game plan. (Washington Post)


        Your film alludes to various versions of the  "sleeping beauty" myth — was there a single starting point? (New York Times) 


  To elude, on the other  hand, is to get away. Elude does love  hiding from the law, but it can also refer to an idea you can't grasp or cheap  health care:


        It  was a secluded zone with no mobile telephone reception — perfect for eluding law enforcement snooping. (New York  Times)


        Gregory Standifer was arrested at the scene after  allegedly attempting to elude police by jumping out of a  window, police said. (Chicago Tribune) 


        How the aspiring artist achieved his accomplished  technique eludes us. (New York  Times)


        Good,  cheap health care has long eluded America. (Economist)


Allude to something by  saying all but what you actually want  to say. Elude evades and gets away, like  a name that's on the tip of your tongue. 

When you allude to something, you don't identify it or mention it specifically. If you allude to the fact that a cop is sitting right behind you, your friends might stop talking about their plans to rob a bank. Continue reading...

Elude means "evade or escape," like the way you might elude the other kids during a game of hide-and-seek. This word can also mean "to be hard to understand." No matter how hard you try, the finer points of quantum physics might elude you. Continue reading...



allusion/
illusion/
delusion


  Novelists, magicians, and  other tricksters keep these words busy. Novelists love an allusion, an indirect reference to something  like a secret treasure for the reader to find; magicians heart illusions, or fanciful fake-outs; but tricksters suffer from delusions, ideas  that have no basis in reality. 

Blink  and you'll miss it: an allusion is a quick  indirect mention of something. It's a literary device that stimulates ideas,  associations, and extra information in the reader's mind with only a word or  two:


    Littlemore was not quick at  catching literary allusions. (Henry James)

Thomas Paine's writings contain  several affectionate allusions to his father, but none  to his mother. (Daniel Moncure Conway)

Magicians love to create illusions, or visual tricks, like making  a tiger disappear or sawing a person in half. Your eye can be fooled by an  optical illusion, and Dorothy and the  gang get to the bottom of the Wizard's illusion and discover he's just a regular guy. Illusions aren't always glamorous; sometimes they're just hiding the man behind the  curtain:


    "We have no illusion that these credits are going to create lots of new jobs," the editorial said. (New York Times)


    But while  investing in your company's stock might feel safer than betting on the stock  market as a whole, that is usually an illusion. (Seattle  Times)


Delusions are like illusions but they're meaner. A delusion is a belief in something despite the fact that it's completely untrue. Hence  the phrase is delusions of grandeur. People with delusions often wind up on the shrink's couch. Whether you are  trying to deceive yourself or someone is trying to deceive you, if you believe  the false idea, you have a delusion about reality:


Delusions are closely  allied to hallucinations and generally accompany the latter. (Samuel Henry Prince)

Two medical  experts had concluded then that the accused gunman suffered from schizophrenia,  disordered thinking and delusions. (Reuters)

"Basically, I think he's  suffering from delusions of grandeur," he said. (Chicago Tribune)

An allusion shows up in art,  while illusions love kids' parties.  If you believe something despite  reality, you have a delusion. 

That little nod to a Dylan Thomas poem that you sneaked into your PowerPoint presentation? That was an allusion, a quick reference to something that your audience will have to already know in order to "get." Continue reading...

A delusion is a belief that has no evidence in fact — a complete illusion. The cook at the hot dog stand who thinks he is the best chef in the world? That opinion is definitely a delusion. Continue reading...

An illusion is something that isn't real. It may look real, but it's actually fake — just a crafty construction or fantasy. Like the old rabbit-out-of-the-hat trick practiced by magicians around the globe. Continue reading...



alternate/
alternative


  To alternate is to take turns; an alternative is an option. When you wear your  checkered blazer, the black and white squares alternate. But if you're  not feeling like an '80s guitar hero, the green plaid jacket is a nice alternative. 

Alternate can act a noun, verb, or an  adjective, that nut. As a noun, it's a substitute, like the alternate who takes over for you in a game or in a jury: 


    Several, including alternates, have taken notes and kept lists of evidence. (Washington  Post)


  As a verb it refers to the act  of something going back and forth:


    So it went on all day—heavy showers that lasted for a few minutes alternating with brief, bright intervals. (Mrs. Herbert Strang)

As an adjective, it describes  two options taken in turns: 


    The alternate jersey will have an interlocking SD on the left chest. (Washington Post)


Alternative can be an adjective or noun,  too. As an adjective it describes something available as another choice,  including alternative lifestyles. As a noun, it means one of two or more  choices. Here are some alternative sentences:


    Some harriers have  evolved an alternative lifestyle — cross-dressing. (New York Times)


    Diaspora, an alternative to Facebook, was founded  by four New York University students in 2010. (Washington Post)

People often say alternate when they mean alternative, maybe because it's shorter. No one's going to freak  out if you mix them up, but use alternate for what those checkerboard  squares do on your rock star blazer, and save alternative to describe  the music it makes you want to crank up.

On a checkerboard, black squares alternate with white ones. As a verb, alternate means to do something in turns. As a noun, an alternate is a replacement. Continue reading...

When you're facing a fork in the road, you have two possibilities, or alternatives. You could take the left fork and see where it leads, or you could choose the path that goes to the right. Continue reading...



ambiguous/
ambivalent


  Something ambiguous is unclear or vague, like the end  of a short story that leaves you scratching your head. But if you're ambivalent about something, you can take it  or leave it. Whatever.


Ambiguous is  something that is confusing or has more than one meaning. It can be the ambiguous look your ex-girlfriend gives  you as she leaves the library, or the ambiguous ending of the movie Lost Highway,  where you don't know what the heck just happened. Here's the word in action from  the news: 


    Are there threads you might come back to later, or  was that a deliberate choice to leave some things about him ambiguous?  (New York Times)

 "The election law in New York is written in an  ill-defined, ambiguous way," Goldfeder said, adding that he did not  believe any laws were broken. (Reuters)


Ambivalent is  when you don't hate something, but you don't love it either. Since you feel two  ways about it, you don't really care. It's often used to describe feelings, attitudes,  and relationships:


    Danya, now nearly 14, was ambivalent about  leaving, drawn toward being a teenager in New York City. (New York Times)


    Valentine's Day When You're Dating a Woman You're Ambivalent About. (All Word News)


    He had told me early on that he was ambivalent about his maleness but had made peace with it. (New York Times)


  When  choosing between ambiguous and ambivalent, consider whether you  are describing something that is unclear or vague: that's ambiguous. If  it's a fluctuation in attitude or feeling, that's ambivalent. If you're ambivalent about ambiguous movie endings, stay away from David Lynch and stick to blockbusters when the  good guys win. 

Look to the adjective ambiguous when you need to describe something that's open to more than one interpretation, like the headline "Squad helps dog bite victim." Continue reading...

If you can't decide how you feel about something, declare yourself ambivalent about it. Continue reading...



amicable/
amiable


Amicable refers to a friendliness or  goodwill between people or groups. Amiable refers to one person's  friendly disposition. A group might have an amicable meeting, because the people there  are amiable. 


Amicable comes from the Latin amicabilis, for friendly, which can be traced to the Latin amicus, for friend. Here  are some friendly examples:


        Through an email, Sala said negotiations have been  very amicable and that both sides are motivated to get a deal done.  (Seattle Times)


        It was a relatively amicable divorce and  at least they remain on speaking terms. (BBC)


        The split was amicable, Mr. Robbins said, with  his former partner breaking even on the sale and returning to the music  business. (New York Times)


Amiable also comes from the Late Latin amicabilis, with a stop in Old French as amiable before English adopted it. Some  experts use amiable to describe only people, but amiable is also  used to describe things being sociable or agreeable, like an amiable tone of voice. It's usually used  for people, though: 


        A tall, amiable man, he wears a white hard  hat with "JOE" written in faded marker on the front. (Washington Post)


        One former roommate described him as amiable and talkative. (New York Times)


Amicable refers to the connections  between people or things, like a friendly situation with a crowd. Take out the  "c" for crowd and you're left with amiable,  one friendly person. 

A friendly, pleasant person could be described as amiable. Airline flight attendants tend to be amiable. The people monitoring the school's cafeteria? Maybe not. Continue reading...

The adjective amicable means "friendly" — but in particular, use it when describing relations one might otherwise expect to be unfriendly. The end of a romantic relationship that's less than amicable might involve broken dishes or broken bones. Continue reading...



amoral/
immoral


  Both have to do  with right and wrong, but amoral means having no sense of either, like a  fish, but the evil immoral describes someone who knows the difference,  doesn't care, and says "mwah ha ha" while twirling a mustache.

If you are amoral, you're  not a jerk, you just don't know that what you're doing is wrong. In the 1800s,  Robert Louis Stevenson, author of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde (among other  treasures), coined the word amoral to differentiate from immoral.  Amoral is generally more descriptive, rather than judgmental: 


    In an age  enamored of machines, life becomes amoral, without moral bearings,  devoid of moral categories. (Edith Sizoo)


Amoral nature  committed the crime "the man" could not. (Eye for Film)


Immoral is having no  morality, being wicked or evil. If you are immoral, you know what  society considers right and wrong, yet you do wrong anyway. It's a judgment, no  doubt:


    The bankers who  took millions while destroying people's savings: greedy, selfish, and immoral. (Business Week)


    At best, it is  in bad taste and worse, flatly immoral. (Scientific American)


  If you call someone immoral, you are saying that person knows better. If you call him amoral, you are  saying that person does wrong but doesn't understand that it is wrong. It can  be a fine line, other times it's clear: If a giant wave turns your boat over,  that wave isn't being mean, it's amoral. If another boat rams into you  and does the same thing, that is an immoral act, especially if the immoral captain laughs instead of helping you out of the water.

Use the adverb amorally to describe something that's done without any thought about whether it's right or wrong. If you wonder why anyone would buy the more expensive "fair trade" coffee, you probably make buying decisions amorally. Continue reading...

Use the adjective immoral to describe a person, group, or situation that intentionally goes against accepted ideas of what is right, like a government that attacks its own people, or a friend who steals your favorite spatula. Continue reading...



amuse/
bemuse

People often use the word bemuse when they mean amuse, but to amuse is to entertain, and to bemuse is to confuse. In Alice in Wonderland,  the White Rabbit amuses Alice as he  frolics, but then the Cheshire Cat bemuses her when he tells her to go two directions at once. 

To amuse someone is to make them laugh or otherwise keep their  attention. It's often used in the negative — if someone says that a joke does  not amuse her, duck before you get slapped. In the movie Goodfellas, a tough guy says darkly, "...I'm a clown? Do I amuse you?" Here are friendlier examples:


    There's nothing spellbinding left to amuse our children. (Forbes)


    This was fashion as theater and an  often amusing way  to end Paris Fashion Week. (New York Times) 

To bemuse is to confuse or muddle, and it's almost always in the form bemused. It sounds like that other word,  but it's not as fun to be bemused. These examples get it right:

Another  father seemed bemused that his son had been taken in by the police after he went for a walk on  Saturday.  (BBC)

In  the past, reviews of Bosco's dazzlingly vivid apparel and sneakers have ranged  from admiring to bemused to scathing. (New York Times)

The  passengers, bemused at first, were quickly won over once  they realized who was performing. (Time)

It's no wonder people get  them mixed up — both words are derived from the French word "muse." It's just  like a French muse to entertain and confuse us all in the same root word.

If you enjoy making people laugh, you like to amuse them, which is a good trait to have as long as you don't amuse people during a math test or other solemn occasion. Continue reading...

The word amused means "pleasantly occupied" or "entertained.” If you love dogs, you’ll be amused just watching puppies frolic in the park all day. If you love everything, you’re easily amused. Continue reading...

To bemuse is to confuse or puzzle. You could bemuse your teacher by writing an essay as a series of haikus, but don’t. Usually a bemused teacher is not a happy one. Continue reading...

If you're bemused, you're muddled or preoccupied. It happens when you're lost in thought, dazed, or overwhelmed (say, on the first day of high school). Continue reading...



anecdote/
antidote


  An anecdote is a funny  little story; an antidote counteracts  poison. Tell someone an anecdote about your close encounter with a rattlesnake and how the cute park ranger had  to get you the antidote for snake  venom right away. 


  An anecdote is a story someone tells about themselves or  people they know. It's often short and unreliable. That rattlesnake encounter?  Well, maybe you embellished a bit — you saw a rattlesnake, but it didn't bite  you. Anecdotes can be true or false;  they're revealing little tales:


      All  the little anecdotes I had heard of him pleased me very much. (Miranda Eliot Swan)

The  pages are thick with freaky anecdotes: One patient suffers  permanent brain damage after an anesthesiologist causes him to nearly  suffocate. (Washington Post)

Mr. Smith offered only anecdotes to back  his beliefs. (New York Times)


  An antidote cures what  ails you. It's an actual counteragent to a poison, like snake venom. It's what  you need if your wife tries to kill you, like poor Wang below, or when you just  need to turn that frown upside down: 


      Then he told the physician there was  only one way to save Wang's life — an antidote called Prussian Blue.  (Daily Mail.uk) 


      Forced blossoms are an antidote to the gloomy winter months (Digthedirt.com)


  An anecdote is a  memoir sound bite, a little story. They're fun, but they don't change your  destiny. But antidote, is anti-poison, so dote on situations that require antidotes — your life may be on the line. 

A short, amusing true story is an anecdote. You might come back from a crazy spring break with a lot of anecdotes to tell. Continue reading...

An antidote is a remedy that relieves. So if you get headaches from long bus rides, it's best to travel equipped with the key pain alleviating antidotes: Tylenol, lots of water and soothing music. Continue reading...



appraise/
apprise


  To appraise is to estimate the value of something, but  remove the second "a," and you have apprise, which means "to tell." If you hire someone to appraise your house, you might have to apprise your family of the fact that you  now owe the bank more than your house is worth.


Appraise sounds like "a praise," which  is what you hope for when someone appraises you or your three-story  colonial.  The crystal ball is cloudy,  but appraise probably comes from Middle French (apreis-) and Late  Latin (appretiare), meaning to estimate the value or quality of something,  such as a house, an employee's performance, or your grandmother's owl pin. Here  are some appraises from the world:


    The cancelations  reflected mortgage applications that were refused or because appraised home values were coming in below the sales price, the group said. (Business  Week)


    Treasure Hunters  Roadshow is visiting El Paso this week appraising all kinds of  collectibles. (Treasure Hunters Roadshow)


    You can see an  etching of the event: King Kalakaua in white tie and tails, appraising a  long banquet table. (Washington Post)


Apprise comes from the French apprendre, to learn or inform via the Latin apprendere, to learn. These days apprise means to inform or tell. These examples will apprise you of how to use  it:


    When asked whether  transit officials were apprised of complaints made via 311, the city's  help line, Mr. Prendergast struggled to answer. (New York Times)


    He took  responsibility for not keeping Mr. Bloomberg sufficiently apprised of  the cleanup effort. (New York Times)


  To keep it straight, if your  boss appraises you, you hope for praise! If you apprise someone  of a situation, you might also have to advise her on what to do. Apprise — sounds like "a prize" — has another meaning, too, which is to gain in value. 

When you buy a house someone will need to appraise its value before you can get a mortgage. To appraise something is to figure out its worth in the marketplace, on the field, or in the world of ideas. Continue reading...

To apprise someone about something is to fill them in, to give them the scoop. If someone in your immediate family wins the mega-bucks lottery, you want to be the first one to be apprised of that event! Continue reading...



ascent/
assent

Assent refers to agreement, while an ascent is a climb. Before we make our way to the top of Mount Everest, we need to make sure our guide assents to our ascent.

An ascent is a physical climb up something, like your ascent up a rock wall at the gym. This word can also be used with reference to something less tangible, like an ascent up the corporate ladder. Ascents are for rockets and rock stars. Here are some examples:

Suddenly the temperatures plummeted as we began an ascent into mist-wrapped mountains, a conifer-clad peak thrusting its nose into the clouds. (Washington Post)

It was there he caught Fairchild’s eye and started his ascent up the corporate ranks. (Los Angeles Times)

Assent is a rather formal way to say “agree.” If your parents assent to having your best friend stay for the weekend, go ahead and get the extra bed ready. As a noun, assent refers to an agreement. Here are some examples:

What happens if a consumer with one of these devices declines to assent to a revised privacy agreement? (Wall Street Journal)

The doctor should also talk directly to the child, even if the child is young, Dr. Greenberg said, explaining the plan, and answering questions, and getting the child’s assent to treatment. (New York Times)

Here's a handy trick to remember the difference between these homophones: ascent has a c for “climb,” while assent has those two agreeable s’s in the middle.

If you are moving in an upward direction, that's an ascent, like your quick ascent from new group member last year to president this year. Continue reading...

Assent means agreement. If you nod your head in assent, you agree to something or you assent to it. Continue reading...



assume/
presume

Assume and presume both mean to believe something before it happens, but when you assume you're not really sure. If someone bangs on your door in the middle of the night, you might assume (and hope!) it's your crazy neighbor. If your neighbor knocks on your door every night at 6:30, at 6:29 you can presume she's coming over in a minute.

To assume is to suppose or believe something without any proof. It also means to take over, usually responsibilities and duties, such as with a job, or to take on a look or attitude:

First, based on your question, we'll assume you're a recent college graduate. (USA Today)

Receiving no reply, three days later he sent a second missive, in which he assumed that his first letter had gone astray. (Elizabeth S. Kite)

"I won't have him," said Sir Henry at once, his eyes assuming their most prawnlike expression. (Mary Cholmondeley)

Presume is from the Latin pre "before" and sumere "to take," like taking something for granted. It means to be sure of something before it happened. When you presume, you suppose something without proof, based on probability:

In her latest video, Britney Spears arrives on earth — an alien, we presume — to spread the message of consumerism. (Washington Post)

I favor the latter explanation, also known as a sensibly presumed truth, just as I believe William Shakespeare wrote a few plays in his day. (Time)

People don't love it when you assume, based on the catchy phrase that calls you an ass, because you're basically making a guess. When you assumed it was your neighbor knocking on your door and you told her to go away, you found out later it was your mom! There's no funny phase about presume, because you're usually right.

Assume isn't only used to mean "accept as truth without checking"; it also means "take on the form of." It might be safer if you don't assume that the vampire standing in front of you isn't merely a person assuming that form. Continue reading...

If you presume something, it means you act as though it's true before all the evidence is in. If you are presumed to be the fastest runner, don't get too cocky — that word implies that you haven't actually raced yet. Continue reading...



assure/
ensure/
insure


  Although these three often  show up at the same party, giving hugs, they're not the same, thank you very  much. To assure is to tell someone  everything's ok, to ensure is to make  certain, and to insure is to protect  financially. Have it straight now? Are you sure? 

To assure is to remove doubt, or confidently tell someone about something. It's generally  followed by an object, so you assure someone.  You can also tell someone to rest assured when you know everything's under control:


    "Rest assured that Brazil will have a great World Cup in 2014," Rebelo said. (Washington Post)


    I assure you  I meant no harm. (V for Vendetta)


    He considered  retirement before doctors assured him he could still fight.  (Newsweek)


Ensure, on the other hand, means to make certain a thing will (or won't) happen:


    Aides said the  leaders conferred by telephone to ensure that their speeches, while  different in tone, would not be incompatible. (Reuters)


    Roast Brussels  sprout mixture on sheet pan for 12 to 15 minutes, shaking pan about halfway  through to ensure even cooking. (New  York Times)


    The "feed kids  first" policy is designed to ensure that parents can eat in  peace. (New York Times)


  Finally, use insure when  you need insurance. To insure is to  arrange for financial compensation against the loss of something or against  someone getting hurt or dying. You might insure your health, your Cadillac, your beachside condo, or your stocks and bonds:


    Very well then, listen: You know  our house was insured for a good deal of money — fifteen thousand dollars. (Gabrielle Emile)

Euro-area finance  chiefs meeting tonight also will discuss using the European Financial Stability  Facility to insure bonds of troubled governments. (Business Week)


    Remarkably,  younger and healthier individuals in other industrialized countries have long  accepted the mandate to be insured in return for  community-rated premiums and guaranteed issue. (New York Times)


  Sometimes people say ensure or insure when they really mean assure, to remove doubt. Bryan Garner points out in Garner's Modern American Usage that the usage has become "ubiquitous." Harrumph! We assure you that there is a difference,  and by reading this you've ensured that you know your homonyms, but alas we can't insure you. It's just not that kind of party.

If you assure your boss that you’ll finish your project by Tuesday, you are make a promise or commitment to have it done by Tuesday. Continue reading...

When you ensure that something will happen, you guarantee it. All that homework will ensure that you have no time for fun this afternoon! Continue reading...

To insure is to guarantee or protect the monetary value of something with, as you might imagine, insurance. Continue reading...



aural/
oral/
verbal


Aural refers to the ear or hearing,  and oral to the mouth or speaking. Something verbal is  expressed in words, either spoken or written. Listen to the aural sensations of songs from outer space when you've been gassed for your oral surgery. Then stay non-verbal because you can't use words for a  long time after the dentist wakes you up.


Aural is related to the sense of  hearing:


    While the songs may be familiar, the delivery is the aural version of having one's stocking stuffed. (technorati.com)


    Audio  teams capture far-flung aural impressions to set the proper movie mood (Dallas Morning News)


  Our  second word, oral, refers to something spoken (rather than written) or  something related to the mouth:


    The Long Island Storytelling Network will be telling  tales at the library on Wednesday to help revive the oral tradition. (Storynet.org)


Oral cancer has always been a bigger threat to men than women. (Washington Post)


  Now  what about oral vs. verbal? They both relate to something  expressed through words, but oral is  spoken and verbal can be spoken or written. Oral and verbal are often used interchangeably — both describe spoken words after all. But  they're not always interchangeable. If your little sister sticks everything in  her mouth, she has an oral fixation.  If she can recite the Constitution by age two, she's quite verbal. Consider these quotes from articles about college  basketball:

K-State basketball gets oral commitment from 7-footer Diaz. (Wichita Eagle)


    Gipson is Kansas State's second verbal commitment. (Fox  Sports)


  Using  those definitions, Diaz told K-State he'd join the team. He didn't sign any  paperwork. But Gipson could have signed on the dotted line, or he might have  just spoken his commitment.


  Remember:  if it's related to the ear or hearing, you want aural. If it's related to something spoken  or to the mouth, it's oral. And although verbal can mean spoken or written, oral can only mean spoken.  

If you have excellent aural abilities, it means that your ears work well. Aural means "pertaining to hearing." Continue reading...

The word oral means having to do with the mouth or speaking. When you give an oral report in school, you stand in front of the class and talk. Continue reading...

If your friend tells you that the speech you just made was really verbal, he means you used too many words, overstated the point, went on too long, were redundant. Continue reading...



aver/
avow

Aver is a formal word that comes from the Latin root verus, meaning "true." In the courtroom, aver means to officially state the truth, but you can use aver anytime you need to confirm that something is a fact, like so:

As a photographer, I can aver that Post photographer Jabin Botsford is a bona fide graphic genius when it comes to covering the White House beat. (Washington Post)

That effort, they avowed, will "send a strong signal to the Chinese Communist Party that the American people are committed to defending U.S. interests in the Indo-Pacific." (Salon)

So remember, to aver is to verify, and to avow is to tell the whole world.

To aver is to state something or declare something is true. This verb has a serious tone, so you might aver something on a witness stand or you might aver that you won't back down to a challenge. Continue reading...

When you avow something, you say it openly for the whole world to hear. If you're a witness in a trial, you'll be asked to take an oath in which you'll avow that you'll tell the truth. Continue reading...



bare/
bear

Bare means naked, but to bear is to carry something. A bear is also a brown furry animal, but most people keep that one straight.

To bare is to uncover, either by removing clothes or revealing something. It's getting down to the bare bones. Bare-knuckled or barehanded means the gloves are off. Don't walk on glass in bare feet, and don't bare your soul to a con artist. Let's reveal a few good examples of bare:

In our textbooks, there are photos of physicians a century ago performing autopsies with their bare hands. (Salon)

At a bare minimum the crisis cost nearly $20,000 for each American. (New York Times)

If you can't bear to be naked, you can't stand it. Bear is to put up with or carry something, like a burden or a baby. Or both. It's spelled just like the animal. Grin and bear it means to smile during a storm, not to smile and disrobe. The Second Amendment of the U.S. Constitution mentions the right to bear arms, and it has nothing to do with tank tops. If a tree bears fruit, you're in luck. Here are some non-furry bears caught in the wild:

But he could not bear to live in their dream without the one who was to share it. (Time)

Your son will still be your son, and your grandchildren your grands, no matter what name they bear. (New York Times)

If you can't bear to remember it all, just imagine a lumbering grizzly carrying a heavy load, and you'll bear this knowledge with glee! If a bear bares his teeth, though, run!

When you kick off your shoes to walk on the beach, you are enjoying the feeling of your bare feet in the warm sand. The adjective bare describes something or someone that is naked or unclothed. Continue reading...

To bear is to carry or endure, whether by physical or mental force. If you can bear to read on, you'll find out all the different ways to use the word bear. Continue reading...



bazaar/
bizarre


Bazaar and bizarre might sound alike but a bazaar is a market  and bizarre describes something kooky. There could be a bizarre  bazaar run by monkeys selling people feet. 


  A bazaar is usually a  market in the Middle East. Picture lots of booths with merchants selling their  wares. It's crowded, with haggling going on all around and pungent smells from  the food vendors. Istanbul's Grand Bazaar is a good example. The American  version of a bazaar is quite tame by comparison. It's a temporary  (usually a day or two) market offering various goods for sale for a charitable  cause, such as a church or school. Here are some examples of both:


    Abdul Halim, an Afghan Special  Forces sergeant, happened to be passing through the bazaar in his truck.  (New York Times) 


    Arab Festival: Food,  coffeehouse, children's activities, fashion show, bazaar, performances,  panel discussions, noon-7 p.m. (Seattle Times) 

 Cochise  College Adult Education will host a craft bazaar fundraiser from 10 am  to 3 pm Wednesday, Nov. 17 at the Sierra Vista Campus. (Sierra Vista Herald)

The  other half of our word pair, bizarre, is an adjective meaning strange or  very unusual, wacky, odd:


      Cain's bizarre ad had mustached campaign manager Mark Block  blowing cigarette smoke at the camera. (New York Times)

 The video, which was posted days ago but gained Internet traction  on Tuesday, was called "bizarre" and "strange" in  some media reports. (Reuters)


  The  only reason you might get bazaar and bizarre mixed up is that  they sound the same. You won't find them together often, unless you're in the  market for some human toes.

A bazaar is a market that has rows and rows of little shops selling miscellaneous stuff — like tube socks, velvet paintings, and corn on the cob. Continue reading...

Someone or something bizarre is odd or unusual in appearance, style, or character. If your teacher walks into class wearing a purple boa, lime-green cowboy boots, and a scuba mask, you might comment, "How bizarre!" Continue reading...



breach/
breech

If you break a contract, it's a breach. If you're talking about pantaloons, guns, or feet-first babies, use breech with a double "e."

A breach is a break — whether it's a breach in contract or a breach in a dam. Lawyers like it because they can help if there's a breach of the law. Whales break free from the water when they breach, but no one wants them to breach the side of their boat because that boat would sink. Just ask the Pequod. Other examples:

"It is impossible to tell if there is a specific breach of any conflict of interest laws." (New York Times)

"All 68 passengers and crew are safe, authorities said, and the vessel itself incurred only a small breach in its hull." (Time)

A breech, double "e," is an opening at back of the gun. It's also the word for hindquarters. The breech is on the butt of a gun, but it's also sometimes the buttocks of a human. Seriously. Breeches is an old word for pants, or britches, the kind George Washington rocked. You can still get breeches, though, for horseback riding. If a baby is born feet- or bottom-first, that's a breech birth. Examples:

"A 'magazine' is a chamber for holding a supply of cartridges to be fed automatically to the breech of a gun, according to Merriam-Webster's dictionary." (Forbes)

"Goforth said the first baby came out and then the second baby came out breech birth, meaning the baby was delivered feet first." (Washington Times)

Use breach is there's a break, but save breech for guns, pants, and babies.

A breach is a violation of a law, duty, or promise. If you'd contracted to mow your neighbor's lawn and don't do it, he can sue you for breach of contract. Or he can mow the lawn himself. Continue reading...

A breech is an opening in a gun where bullets are loaded. If you’re battling armed zombies, remember that the breech is in the rear. Speaking of rears, in a breech birth, a baby comes out feet, or rear, first. Continue reading...



bridal/
bridle

Bridal is related to a bride, but bridle refers to a part of a horse's harness and what you do with it. Although the words sound the same, they run in different circles unless you're getting a horse ready for her wedding.

Bridal refers to something to do with a bride or a wedding. It comes from the Old English word brydealo for wedding feast. It's formed from bryd, for bride, and ealo, or ale, which was often drunk at wedding feasts. Here's bridal in the news:

There are bridal trends that will never go away, such as the classic white gown and the big balloon skirt. (ABC News)

Forgo the champagne treatment a bridal boutique often provides. (Associated Press)

"I wanted nothing bridal, nothing white," Mr. Alexandre said. (New York Times)

The word bridle also comes from an Old English word, meaning "to move quickly."  Used as a noun, bridle is part of a horse's harness. As a verb, it can be used to mean restrain, as you would a horse in its bridle. If you bridle at something, you're angry or offended.

Before the tent sits a cavalier, glass in hand and holding a horse by the bridle, talking to a woman standing in front of him. (Esther Singleton)

As a result, I instantly bridle at news the government could sell off these beautiful and therapeutic spaces in search of a quick buck. (BusinessGreen.com)

You can think of this form of bridal as bride + -al, and all of the stuff that goes with a wedding, but bridle is the thing that restrains a horse, and what you might do if someone tried to put a leather harness on your head.

Use the adjective bridal to talk about a wedding or a bride. A bridal bouquet is the arrangement of flowers the bride carries during a wedding ceremony. Continue reading...

When you're riding a horse and scream "Whoa!" to make it stop, you're pulling on the reins, which are attached to a thing called the bridle, the buckled straps around a horse's head that help you control its movements. Continue reading...



broach/
brooch

To broach a subject is to bring it up. A brooch is a decorative pin. These words sound exactly the same! They rhyme with “coach.” Both come from a word root meaning “something pointy,” but the spelling brooch branched off as a word for the piece of jewelry.

The word broach comes from a Middle English word for “pointed tool.” These days, it’s usually used as a verb meaning “to mention something gently” or “to bring up a difficult subject.” Here are some examples:

Change that “a” to an “o” and you have brooch. This word is usually pronounced the same way as broach, but if you say it to rhyme with “pooch,” that’s acceptable too. A brooch is a decorated pin, like a golden owl brooch with emerald eyes. Take a look at these lovely brooches in the news:

To remember the difference, broach has an a like "approach," and brooch has two o’s like eyes on an owl brooch.

Broach means to bring up or introduce a sensitive issue. If your best friend has severe phobia of spiders, you might want to delicately broach the topic of your new pet tarantula, Mr. Fuzzy. Continue reading...

That fancy pin your Grandma used to wear on her blouse or lapel? It's a brooch, held in place by a sharp needle clasp. Continue reading...



callus/
callous

A callus is a place on the skin that’s thick from rubbing up against something. Calluses can be annoying, but they're helpful for some activities. If you’re learning to play guitar, for example, calluses on your fingertips make it easier to press the strings down. Here are some rough patches in the wild:

Being callous means like acting like a callus — hard and insensitive. Ignoring someone’s plea for help would be a callous thing to do. Here are some hard-hearted examples:

 

A callous person is insensitive or emotionally hardened. If you laugh at your little sister while she's trying to show you her poetry, you're being callous. Continue reading...

A callus is a spot where your skin becomes rough and thick. After wearing flip flops every day, all summer long, you'll probably have a callus between your toes. Continue reading...



capital/
capitol


  Aha! A capital is a  stash of money or the government headquarters of a state. Oh, a capitol is a building. 


  A state's capital is the  primary city and usually the seat of the state government. The most important  city is the capital city. The capital of New York is Albany, for  example. Washington DC is the nation's capital:


    Park Police found an abandoned  vehicle, with an assault rifle inside it, near a bridge leading out of the  nation's capital to Virginia. (New York Times)

Capital is  also a financial word referring to, in a nutshell, the money a person or  business has, not including debts. But wait, there's more! A capital letter starts a sentence or a proper noun, like the capital V for  Virginia. It's also a crime that carries with it the severest penalty (life in  prison or execution):


    Wilson is the 19th  death row inmate to commit suicide since California reinstated capital punishment in 1978, according to the Department of Corrections. (Reuters)


  If you want to sound like a  British spy, use capital to mean excellent, first rate, or really  important:


    In the realm of amateur fruit  growing, on the other hand — a realm now daily widening — dwarf fruit trees are  of capital importance. (F.A. Waugh) 

A capitol (with an o)  is a building that houses a government's legislative branch. When capitol is capitalized (ahem), it refers to the Capitol Building in Washington, DC,  that is home to US Senators and Representatives. It's located on — where else?  — Capitol Hill.


  Remember that capitol with  an o refers to a certain type of building that usually has a dome, then you'll know that in all other cases you want capital with an a.

Capital is the total amount of money (and things with a monetary value, like houses or cars) that a person or institution owns. A bank's capital might be in the billions, while your capital barely makes it into the hundreds. Continue reading...

When you march on the state capitol to protest a bill before the legislature, you are assembling outside a building that houses the state government. Continue reading...



censor/
censure


  A censor hides information. A censure is harsh criticism. They're both judgments and they both stink. 


  Foul language, nudity, and  revolutionary ideas are often censored,  or hidden, by some gang who's in charge, such as a government, the FCC, or your  parents when they kick you out of the room for the best part of the movie. Censor can act as a verb or a noun:


      But Iran routinely censors the Internet using sophisticated filtering technology. (Wall Street Journal)


      The catalog  reproduces a news photograph of "beach censors" arresting women in such  offending garb. (New York Times)


Censure is a strong dislike. When you strongly disapprove of  something, usually in an official capacity, you are censuring that  something, like when the student council censures your idea to have a pool party in December. Here are more examples: 


      "They're tired of  being censured or criticized," Dr. McKenna said. (Time)


      While Maud, still smarting  inwardly from her father's recent sharp censure, had not dared to brave  Mr. Warren's certain anger by doing so. (Laura  Dent Crane)

They sound alike but not the  same: censor sounds like senser and censure sounds like senshure.  Remember: to be censored is to be  stopped from saying something; to be censured is to be reprimanded after you've said it. 

A censor takes out things that are objectionable or inappropriate, like the censors at the TV networks bleeping out all the bad words in a show. Continue reading...

Censure is a noun referring to very strong criticism; the verb means to criticize very strongly. If you take your dad's car without telling him, you can expect him to censure you severely, and maybe even ground you as well. Continue reading...



chord/
cord

Chord and cord sound the same, but a chord is three or more notes played together while a cord is basically a thick string. You strum a chord, but you tie a cord.

The word chord is related to “agreement,” so a chord is made up of notes that somehow agree with each other. A major chord sounds happy, and a minor chord sounds sad. If a sad song makes you cry, it strikes a chord with you. Here are some musical examples:

While these shows vary wildly in style and subject, they all struck a chord with viewers. (Los Angeles Times)

On their backs were loads of equipment — metal beams, cables, and solar panels strapped down with cord — that would be used to build 5G antennas on rocky moraines scattered across the mountainside. (Slate)

Transverse myelitis produces symptoms involving inflammation along the spinal cord that can cause pain, muscle weakness and paralysis. (Los Angeles Times)

In music, a chord is three or more notes that combine harmoniously. You can play chords on a piano or guitar, but not on an instrument that plays one note at a time, like a trumpet. Continue reading...

A cord is a thin rope made of strands of twisted material. You might tie a package with a cord or wear a black cord hung with a silver charm around your neck. Continue reading...



cite/
site/
sight


  All are good for research papers: cite is short for citation, site is a place, and sight is what your eyeballs are for. The  Web has a lot to answer for, good and bad. One item in the minus column is the  increased popularity of site and  people throwing these sound-alikes all over the place!


Cite is a verb to mean to quote, to summon officially, to mention formally, or even  to compliment. It's also the noun form of the same things: a formal summons, or  an official mention. You have to cite your  sources when you write a paper, but it's also a nod to wherever you got your  idea. Check out what cite can do:


      The band, formed  in Ohio 10 years ago, cite numerous influences in  different genres from hip-hop to rock and blues. (Reuters)


      He was taken to  his residence in Bellevue, cited and released. (Seattle Times)


  A site is a specified place, such as a building site, but it's also short for Website, which is a collection  of Web pages that are found within the same URL. Either way it's somewhere you  can go:


      It's taken nearly  nine years, but large-scale commercial redevelopment of the World Trade Center site is tantalizingly close to taking  off. (New York Post)


      The death also was  reported on the singer's web site. (Seattle Times)


Sight,  of course, is vision or something that can be seen. If something is outta sight then it's fabulous whether  you can see it or not. Here's an example of sight:


      Visually impaired  servers who have some sight wear blindfolds. (New York Times)


  Though cite, site, and sight were confused before the Internet, we are more likely to use site for  all of them because we use it so often for Website. If you can remember cite is short for citation and site is a location, whether it's online  or off, you'll have the sight to use the words correctly.

To cite something means to do right by whoever said it and give them credit — for instance, if you add a brilliant statement to a paper but you’re not the one who originally wrote it, you should cite, or point to, the original author. Continue reading...

Your sight is your ability to see. If you're maneuvering through the house at midnight using your shins to locate the furniture, you'll appreciate your sight that much more. You could also turn a light on. Continue reading...

A site is a location. The leader of a Zombie Army might remind his underlings: “Your web site is just a collection of pages at one address on the Web. Your burial site is where you find more soldiers!” Continue reading...



climactic/
climatic


Climactic describes the high point, the most  intense part of a movie, play, song, or, well, anything. Climatic refers  to the climate, like the climatic changes that turned Santa's workshop  into a sauna for elves. 


Climactic comes from climax, with the x changed to a ct.  A climax is the top point of something, so something climactic describes that intense moment. Climactic isoften used in the negative, anticlimactic, like when there's a  build-up to something that falls short. But  let's be positive:


      But I have seldom seen this climactic moment  staged to such haunting effect. (New York  Times) 


      Still, a viewer would have to be made of stone not  to get worked up during the stirring climactic section. (Reuters)


      The skies were shattered with a final climactic crash of thunder. (Virginia Brooks) 


Take out the extra "c," and climatic refers to weather conditions.  The word climatic gets thrown around  a lot these days, with all the talk about global warming, like the climatic insanity that made it snow on  Halloween. FYI: There's no such word as   "anticlimatic." Also, climatic changes  come from the climate, not the soil:


      Warmer and wetter have become cooler  and drier, a wholesale change of climatic fortunes. (Bakersfield Now)


      This will trigger unpredictable climatic disasters in many parts of the  world. (Huffington Post)


      Lee eased Louisiana's worst drought since 1902,  according to the National Climatic Data Center. (Business Week)


To keep climatic and climactic straight, remember  that a climactic moment could be the most intense act yet.  Something climactic gives you a kick!  But climatic is just air. 

Something that is the highest or most exciting point is climactic. This adjective is used to describe a scene, event, or action. If you enjoy a good mystery, you probably love the climactic ending, when you find out whodunnit. Continue reading...

Anything that has to do with weather or other conditions related to climate is climatic. If you're worried about climatic effects on your skin, you are concerned about winter dryness, UV exposure and windburn. Continue reading...



complement/
compliment


  Both are awesome on a  first date — complement means to  complete something, and a compliment is  flattering. If you feel you and your new friend complement each other, maybe it's because he's been giving you so  many compliments like when he says  you look like a supermodel.

To complement, with an e,  means to complete or supplement something, such as chocolates complementing the flowers you give your  date. A complement is the thing doing the completing. The chocolates are  a complement to the flowers. Here are  some things that go well together:


    Even as teenagers,  they finished each other's sentences, complementing and encouraging the  other. (Golf Digest)


    In Ms. Clinton's  case, IAC said her "skills and background complement the existing areas of  expertise of other board members." (New  York Times)


    GM mosquito  technology must be evaluated as a complement to existing control  measures. (Scientific American)


  To compliment, with an i,  is to offer praise to or admiration. This could be in the form of words or  actions. You might compliment your  date on his dance moves, for example. "Your moonwalk is perfect!" is  a compliment. Here are more:


    "I lived on  people's compliments, kind words," she says. (Washington Post)


    Biggest compliment:  After Rob completed his waltz, Judge Len Goodman announced, "You've got the  best footwork of any guy I've seen on this show ever." (Time)


  Once spelled the same, compliment became distinct from complement around 1650. They're still pronounced  the same. You see the difference when they're written, so as long as you're  just yapping no one will know if you mix them up. When writing, though,  remember that a complement completes something, but I like getting compliments.

A complement is something that makes up a satisfying whole with something else. Those shiny red shoes you just bought complement your shiny red purse. Continue reading...

A compliment is an expression of respect or admiration, like, "You're such a good writer," or "You know so many words!" Keep them coming. Continue reading...



compose/
comprise


Compose is to make up a whole, and comprise is to contain parts.  Poodles compose the dog class because the class comprises poodles. The parts compose the  whole, and the whole comprises the  parts. Confused? Everybody else is!


Compose means to make up a whole (it also means to create, but that's not the  definition that troubles people). Mention the parts first, then the whole, as  in "four rooms compose our small  house."The whole can be first if you  say composedof, as in "our house is composed  of four rooms." Check it out:


        Fresh pītal flowers composed the royal throne, Golden blossoms raised the state umbrella. (Vidyapati Thakura)

The nest is composed of dry  grass and lined with finer fibres. (Rev.  C.A. Johns)

Comprise means made up of, contain, include. When you use comprise, mention the whole thing first,  then the parts, as in "the house comprises four rooms." It doesn't need an of after it. (That's the other word.) Here are some examples of the  whole comprising the parts:


        The stories comprised in this volume deserve to be widely known and appreciated. (Williams Andrews)

"Earth" comprises clay, mud, ochre, marl, and "peculiar earths generally." (Georgius Agricola)  

The Penn State  police force comprises 46 armed officers. (Slate) 


  Often comprise shows up in the phrase composed of, but really, comprise does not like of to follow it around. Usage maven Bryan Garner points out that  this error is at stage 4 of his language  change index ;  many are mixing up the words so much that the language is changing, but it  hasn't changed yet. Remember that those fluffy poodles compose the dog  class because the class comprises eager pups. Woof.

To compose is to put something together, like a song, poem, or even yourself. You might want to compose yourself before returning to the party after a good cry. Continue reading...

When something comprises other things, it is made up of them or formed from them. The periodic table comprises 118 elements, because the whole comprises the parts. Continue reading...



concurrent/
consecutive


  Bad guys don't like these  words because they often describe jail terms: concurrent means at the same time, and consecutive means one after the other in a  series. Con artists would rather serve concurrent terms and get them over with, instead of consecutive ones. 

Concurrent events happen at the same time, like when thieves  make a plan to rob two houses at midnight. Here are some examples from the Times. Don't try to read them all at  once:


    Most patients  ultimately require at least two concurrent treatments to achieve  remission of their depression, he said. (New  York Times)


    A second Esquire  promotion, meanwhile, is concurrent with its Brooklyn  Decker effort, with both running through Feb. 28. (New York Times)


    He was given 20 concurrent life sentences, and has been held for nearly 30 years in the Broadmoor  high-security psychiatric hospital west of London. (New York Times)


  The adjective consecutive, on the other hand, means one after the other, like little ducks all in a row. Thieves  go from one house to the next on down the block if they're robbing consecutive houses. Sports fans like the  word consecutive, especially when  their team is winning. Here are some consecutive examples, read them one at a time:


    Harvard also won  its 19th consecutive game at home. (Seattle  Times)


    Each team will  have to play on three consecutive nights at least once.  (Seattle Times)


    South Korea's  factory activity shrank for a fourth consecutive month. (Reuters)


  If the robbers served time consecutively, they'd serve first two  months for robbing houses, and then another two months for stealing a car. If  they served time concurrently, they'd  be out in just two months. Woohoo!

Concurrent means happening at the same time, as in two movies showing at the same theater on the same weekend. Continue reading...

If things are consecutive, they happen one after the other with no break. If there are five consecutive snowstorms on five consecutive days,   you'll have to shovel your way out on day six. Continue reading...



confident/
confidant(e)


Confident is how  you feel on a good hair day, but a confidant is the person you tell when you're secretly wearing a wig. It's  no wonder that these words are so easily confused: they were once both confident. 

If  you're looking and feeling good, you're confident. Confident is  a feeling of self-reliance or of certainty about something. It comes from  Middle French, confident, which in turn comes from Latin, cōnfidentem, meaning "trusting or bold." If you're not confident,  you turn tail and go home. Hold your head up high to read these confident  examples:


    He  appeared confident that he could get to any spot, setting up lanes by  running with patience and vision. (New  York Times)


    Both camps say  they are confident of winning. (Reuters)


  A confidant,  with an a, is the person you trust to  spill your guts to. It also comes from the French confident, which came  from the Latin confidente, for "a trusted friend." Confidante has  been used to refer to a female trusted friend, parallel to the French confidente, but that usage has fallen largely out of favor as an unnecessary feminine  version, like authoress. You  can add that e if you want, either way say it with a sultry French  accent:


    They were friends, confidants,  inseparable companions as well. (Frederick  William Robinson)

 "I'm not talking about just two or three of my  closest confidants." (New York  Times)


  Try remembering that if you are  confident, the person you believe in is "me."  If you have a confidant, you are putting your trust in another.  If you're confident your friend won't  tell all your business, she can be your confidant.

A confidant is the person you tell your secrets to. Your confidant has all the dirt on you, so don't forget his birthday or he might start talking... Continue reading...

If you're a confidante, two things must be true: you have to be female, and you must be someone who people feel comfortable telling secrets to. Continue reading...

If you're confident you are sure about something, someone, or yourself. He was confident he could keep his balance and cross the river on the skinny log, but he wasn't so confident that the log was strong enough to hold him. Continue reading...



connotation/
denotation

A connotation is the feeling a word invokes. But take note! A denotation is what the word literally says. If these words were on a trip, connotation would be the baggage, and denotation would be the traveler.

A connotation is the baggage a word or idea drags around. The word "baggage" often has a negative connotation. If you say someone has baggage, unless they're at the airport, you mean the person is lugging around some drama. Some words, like "awesome birthday cake," have a positive connotation. Here are some other examples:

"Long before the Christian era, people celebrated the winter equinox. Let's remove religious connotations and call it the winter equinox break." (Washington Post)

"I kind of hate that word 'collector' because it has such a financial investment connotation." ( Los Angeles Times)

"Bryan has instead always opted for baseball caps, a fashion item that carries few connotations other than a sense of casualness and youth." (The Guardian)

Denotation  is literally the word for a word! It's the literal meaning of a word, a gesture, or any mark, without emotion. No strings attached. The root of denotation means, "make a note of." Let's make a note of these examples:

"In fact, the 'Parks and Recreation' alum said he didn't know the word's medical denotation." (Los Angeles Times)

"Mr. McDougall gave a strange charge to a gesture that, in Baroque dance, probably has a simple denotation." ( New York Times)

People love to read between the lines, so connotation is more popular, but it's often held up against its more rigid friend denotation.

When you're talking about the implied subtext of words rather than their literal meaning, reach for the noun connotation. A political boss might not want to be called "boss" because of the negative connotations. Continue reading...

Denotation means the literal meaning of a word or name. Although Paris might make you think of romance, its denotation is simply "the city of an old tribe called the Parisii." Continue reading...



connote/
denote


  Don't let the rhyme fool you — to connote is to imply a meaning or  condition, and to denote is to define  exactly. Connote is like giving a  hint, but to denote is to refer to  something outright.


  To connote is to suggest a connection. The word red can connote danger; we use the color red in warning  signs to signify danger. Only words and symbols can connote something; people imply it. Here are some hints:


      The "Good Old  Days" connote a fond remembrance of better times in the past. (Forbes)

 "Dear is a  bit too intimate and connotes a personal  relationship," Ms Barry told the paper. (BBC)


  The word red also denotes a color, and a blue  wheelchair painted on a parking spot denotes handicap parking. A word's denotation is its literal meaning. You can also  use denote to mean to indicate something or to be a sign of something:


      With the meters no  longer denoting each spot, drivers can fill up a parking lane as they  see fit, whether efficiently or inconsiderately. (New York Times)


      Blue colours denote wetter earth; yellow colours show drier conditions. (BBC)


  According to Garner's  Modern American Usage , use of connote for denote is at stage 3 of language change: it's  common even among educated speakers and writers. To keep it straight remember that connote is like imply, and denote is telling you like it is.Musical notes denote sound. What's denote? It's a B-flat. Get it?

Often your body language can connote or imply how you feel without you having to saying it directly. For example, if you fold your arms and look away from someone as he speaks to you, you are connoting your discomfort. Continue reading...

To denote is to draw attention to something or to show what it means. All of the googly-eyed looks that a girl gives to a boy might do more to denote her feelings for him than leaving a note in his locker. Continue reading...



conscious/
conscience

Both words have to do with the mind, but it's more important to be conscious, or awake, than conscience, or aware of right and wrong. Remain conscious while listening to your friend's moral dilemma so you can use your conscience to give good advice.

Conscious, pronounced "KAHN-shuhs," means being aware of yourself or the world around you. It also means being sensitive to something or being awake, not asleep or insensible:

Witnesses say he was bleeding profusely but conscious and talking. (Washington Post)

He was even horribly conscious of a slow pallor creeping over his face. (Bertram Mitford)

Conscience, pronounced "KAHN-shuhns," is a moral understanding, an inner feeling, of right and wrong. If you were a cartoon, your conscience would be that little angel on your shoulder, telling you the right thing to do (and to ignore the little devil on the other side). See the word in action:

They went out guiltily, as men whose consciences troubled them. (Richard Marsh)

Passports are not required, but a social conscience probably is. (New York Times)

To help keep conscious and conscience straight, try emphasizing the second n in conscience, remembering that the conscience deals with your inner thoughts.

A conscience is a built-in sense of what's right and what's wrong. That sick feeling in your stomach after you lied to your brother about borrowing his skateboard? That might be your conscience bothering you. Continue reading...

Conscious is an adjective that simply means alert and awake. If you fall from a tree and smack your head on the side of the wheelbarrow, there's a good chance you won't be conscious afterward. Continue reading...



contemptible/
contemptuous


  Something contemptible is worthy of scorn, like the contemptible jerk who's mean to your sister; but contemptuous is full of it,  like the contemptuous look you give  that guy as he speeds away in his gas guzzler.


  Both words turn contempt into an adjective. Contempt is a noun that describes the feeling that someone is beneath you or the state  of being despised. (There's a legal meaning of contempt, but that's a question for another day!) 


  The -ible ending means "able  to." Contemptible, then, means "able to be scorned, worthy of contempt."  It refers to the person or thing the contempt is aimed at:


      The contemptible crime of stealing a charity  box resulted in a man being remanded in custody at Lerwick Sheriff Court today.  (Shetland Times)


      If familiarity  truly breeds contempt, then money is the most contemptible thing in our lives. (Hamptons.com)


      The educated classes are being  swept along in the contemptible struggle for wealth.  (Friedrich Nietzsche)

The –ous ending means "full  of," so contemptuous means "full of contempt, showing scorn." It refers  to the person or thing showing the scorn, like that contemptuous glare you gave that mean kid who dumped your sister,  or in these examples:


  Mr. Beck is, of  course, free to be as contemptuous towards the president as he wants to be, but officers in the United States  military are not. (Huffington Post)


      Both men are now  dismissive, even contemptuous, of each other's competence. (New York Times)


      The reporter, gathering his wits,  gave a contemptuous laugh. (Herman  Landon)

Remember, then, if something is able to be scorned, it is contemptible. If someone or something is full  of contempt, it is contemptuous. That contemptible thug made you feel contemptuous.

Someone or something that's contemptible receives harsh judgment and deserves it.  Your desire to bring to justice the contemptible coward who stole your last chocolate bar seemed noble, until you realized you'd eaten it the night before. Continue reading...

If you insult someone or dismiss them in a hateful way, you're being contemptuous. The difference between being hateful and contemptuous is subtle. It involves disdain. Continue reading...



continual/
continuous


  The words continual and continuous are like twins:  they both come from continue, but  they get mad if you get them confused. Continual means start and stop, while continuous means never-ending.

Continual things come and go, like  arguments or rain. If your parents' continual arguing drives you crazy, just be glad they stop sometimes! With continual rain, you'll get some sunny breaks,  as Ireland's forecasters like to say. Or in this bit about the birth of Lynyrd  Skynyrd:


    There were continual battles between authority figures like Skinner and the free spirits who formed  the band. (herald-review.com)


Continuous, on the other hand, is nonstop.  If the young Skynyrds had a continuous argument  with authority, they'd never stop, not even to sing "Free Bird." With continuous rain, you'll never see the  sun. A flight or a wire can be continuous:


    Jongeward and Woodhouse ended up breaking the record  for continuous flight. They stayed in  the air for 1,124 hours. (Yuma Sun)


    A telegraphic signal would go more than seven times  around the earth in one second if it travelled on one continuous wire. (Elmer Ellsworth Burns)


Continual is chronic, like a cough that  comes and goes, or a teenager's sporadic fights with The Man. Continuous is like a circle, or a  nightmare carousel that never ever stops. Neither one is the evil twin; they're  both moody.

The adjective continual describes something that's recurring, that happens again and again. If your pet wolf keeps up his continual howling all night, your neighbors will let you know about it. Continue reading...

The adjective continuous describes something that occurs over space or time without interruption. Some computer fans make a continuous noise — a constant buzz — that can drive you to distraction. Continue reading...



correlation/
corollary


  A correlation is exactly what it sounds like: a co-relation, or relationship — like the correlation between early birds waking up and the sun rising. But corollary is more like a consequence,  like the corollary of the rooster  crowing because you smacked it in the beak. Both words love the math lab but  can hang with the rest of us, too. 

A correlation is a relationship, but not a cause and effect one. In statistics, a correlation is some connection between  random variables or data values. Since correlation is a kind of relation, it's often followed by "between." Here are some  examples of correlations out in the  world:


Correlation is not necessarily causation, so I'm sure this has nothing to do with the  departure of Rahm Emanuel. (New York  Times)


    Their study looked  only at wider geographical patterns, showing a correlation between  an area's radon levels and rates of the skin cancer. (Reuters)


Corollary, on the other hand, is one thing naturally following another. In mathematics, a  theorem is a statement proven true through reasoning. Its corollary is a statement so closely related that it doesn't need to  be proven independently. For the rest of us, it's more like the aftermath of  something. Let's look at some examples:


    The corollary to this finding is that dairy products have no effect on cough, he said. (New York Times)


    There is a natural  foreign policy corollary: those who see America as a work in progress are  less likely to view it as exceptional. (Time)


  How can non-math geniuses keep  the two straight? Remember that correlation has an equal, though  not necessarily defined, relationship. Corollary is more  like a consequence.

Corollary describes a result that is the natural consequence of something else. You could say that your renewed love of books is a corollary to the recent arrival of a book store in your neighborhood. Continue reading...

Correlation is something that scientists are often trying to show––is there a correlation between smoking and poor health or between napping and productivity? How about daily flossing and good grades? Continue reading...



council/
counsel


  A council is meeting for  discussion or advice, but to counsel is a verb meaning to give advice.  They sound exactly the same, but the language council met and decided to counsel you on how to keep them straight. 


Council is a group of people who get together to figure something out, or or a group  chosen to give advice, like a student council. Used as an adjective, council describes things related to a council, such as a council candidate or a council room, or a council member:


      But the  information was often incomplete or conflicting — and council members  are now asking the agencies to respond to their queries in writing. (New  York Times)


      The council is trying to "contain" acts of armed resistance by military defectors and  described them as "isolated incidents." (Business Week)


  On the other hand, counsel is more slippery; it can act as a noun or a verb. As a noun, counsel is a synonym for advice, but it can also mean the act of giving that  advice or refer to a person who gives legal advice. In fact, a lawyer who goes  to trial for you is your counsel. That lawyer would counsel you.  Here are some counsels in the wild:


      He had argued that  he received ineffective assistance of counsel at trial. (Reuters)

 "Don't go out in the storm  tonight," counseled his wife. (Rossiter Johnson)

Before the 16th century, council and counsel were interchangeable, but by the 1500s, council's  meaning became restricted to "a meeting" and counsel's "to give advice."  The two should not be confused. Never! If you need a verb or a lawyer, use counsel because she'll say something helpful. If you are referring to  a meeting or group, choose c for crowd and council.

A council is a group of people that gathers for the purpose of giving advice or making decisions. If you’re president of the student council, for example, you might organize people to get the hallways at your school painted purple. Continue reading...

When you give counsel or counsel someone, you give advice. If your neighbor is suing you because your dog keeps eating his begonias, you might seek the counsel of a dog trainer or, if that doesn't work, a lawyer. Continue reading...



decent/
descent/
dissent

Decent is all buttoned up. Descent has all the fun because it gets to climb down a mountain. Dissent is what you do when the glee club wants to get matching red outfits but you like purple.

Decent, pronounced "DEE-sent," means "socially acceptable." It's also an old fashioned way to say "polite." These days if you ask someone if she's decent, you probably don't care if she went to finishing school, you're just wondering if she's dressed so you can come in. Decent can also mean good but not excellent. Have it both ways:

He's a decent old chap, but isn't at home much. (Bertram Mitford)

"We're going to work hard out there, and earn a decent living." (New York Times)

Descent, pronounced "dih-SENT," means the act of moving downward, either physically or socially, like an evil cartoon character's descent into the underworld, or a villain's descent into madness, or even your descent into the subway station or down a mountain:

There are a few nasty, short climbs, but several long descents too. (Guardian)

Descent can also refer to a person's cultural background. Makes sense if you think about going down the family tree:

The women, U.S. citizens of Somali descent, are charged with conspiracy to provide material support to a foreign terrorist organization. (Washington Post)

Finally, dissent, also pronounced "dih-SENT" is to pipe up against popular opinion.

It can refer to an opinion that differs from an official or popularly held one.To dissent is to voice such an opinion. There are shades of meaning, but it always means to go against the grain:

Mr. Putin, who has rarely faced public dissent in his 11 years in power, appeared momentarily taken aback, but quickly recovered and finished his statement. (New York Times)

Mrs. Twining curled her mouth in bitter dissent. (Edgar Fawcett)

To recap: decent is fine and you're dressed, descent is to go down down down, and dissent is when your opinion doesn't mesh with others.

The adjective decent means sufficient or acceptable. The local diner you like to frequent may not serve a four-star breakfast, but it probably has decent food. Continue reading...

If you’re on your way down, you’re making a descent, whether that’s as a passenger in an airplane that's landing, or if you’re tumbling down a staircase you just slipped on. Continue reading...

To dissent is to publicly disagree with an official opinion or decision. Dissent is also a noun referring to public disagreement. Continue reading...



definitely/
definitively

Use definitely and definitively when there's no doubt, but save definitely for emphasis and definitively for the final say. If you definitely want to go to a party, but your mom definitively says no, then you aren't going. Quit asking.

Definitely means something is definite — it's unmistakable and clearly defined. It's definitely getting warmer on this planet. It can also mean, "Sure" or "Yes" in response to a question. Would you like cake? Definitely! If you forget how to spell it, just think definite plus -ly (keep the e). Here are some examples of definitely in action:

'No, you don't fail,' he assures her. 'You definitely pass.' (Washington Post)

It's best to wear comfy footwear, and definitely not heels, as their spikes can get stuck in the wooden walkway. (Washington Post)

I definitely felt like a little child again, doing the things I love to do, which is play hockey. (Los Angeles Times)

Definitively is a stronger word — anything definitive is official or conclusive. If a doctor gives you a definitive diagnosis, you know exactly what's wrong. It's not a promise that something will happen; it's a done deal. Just add -ly for definitively (once again, keep the e), to say things like, The court has ruled definitively in favor of the defendant. Here are more examples: 

They are obsessed with them—especially the kind that are never definitively solved. (Time)

Since 2007, the government has eluded its responsibility and has now invented this farce of a discovery to definitively seize the property. (Los Angeles Times)

It is hard to say definitively, because Apple didn't provide exact figures for comparison. (Wall Street Journal)

As you can see, while there are definitely similarities between these two words, they are at heart definitively different! And that's final.

Definite is an adjective describing something that is known for certain. For example, there is no more definite way to get into trouble with a police officer than speeding in front of the police station with a broken taillight. Continue reading...

Use definitely to describe something you don’t have any doubt about. If you are certain you're going to see your friend's band play, you can assure him that you'll definitely be there. Continue reading...

A definitive answer is a final one. A definitive decision by a court of law is one that will not be changed. A definitive translation is one everyone turns to as correct. Definitive means authoritative, conclusive, final. Continue reading...



demur/
demure


  To demur is to show  reluctance or to hesitate, like not quite getting in the car when someone opens  the door, but demure isalways an adjective describing a modest,  reserved, or shy person, and sounds like the mew of a tiny kitten.


Demur is usually a verb, but it can also act as a noun meaning the act of hesitating  or objecting, or indecision. It's like saying "no thanks" by ducking your head  and walking away: 


      "There isn't any too much room in  this bungalow as it is," demurred Mr. Pottle. (Richard Connell)

But strangely,  when given an opportunity to be influential, many demur, backing away  from the conversations that result in the making of decisions. (Computer  World)


      Not surprisingly,  perhaps, Tett stepped out of her chair role's impartiality momentarily to demur at that. (Guardian)


  Add an e to make demure,  which describes a shy, polite, legs-crossed, hands-in-lap kinda gal: 


Demure?  I think you need to read the definition of that word, because no one in hot  pink shorts and red manic panic hair is demure. (x17)


      Canada, represented as a demure little maiden, stands just behind Hawaii, an interested spectator, apparently more  than half inclined to follow his example. (Frederic Taber Cooper)

Demur when a cute trucker invites you to an all-night rave if you want to be  considered demure. Ladies love an e. Demur sounds like dee-mur,  while demure sounds like a baby kitten: de-myure. Mew.

If your mother asks you to clean your room and you refuse, you demur. And if your friend invites you to the Death Metal Forever concert but you hesitate, you demur. Whether you object, politely disagree, or hesitate, you demur. Continue reading...

A demure person can be described as polite and a little shy. A demure outfit is a modest one — think high neckline and low hem. Continue reading...



desert/
dessert

A desert is a hot and dry place like the Sahara, but add an s and some whipped cream and you have a dessert, a sweet treat to eat. Dessert has two s's because you always want two. (If you prefer two arid ecosystems, that's on you.)

A desert (DEH-zert) is dry, but to desert (deh-ZERT) is to leave someone high and dry. Although desert as a verb is pronounced like dessert, if you desert a friend, you walk away. You don't cover anyone in chocolate.

Here's desert used a noun:

And here it is as a verb:

Informally, a desert can also be a place that's missing something, as in this example:

Dessert, on the other hand, has an extra s for the strawberry shortcake at the end of a meal. Some people might have cheese after dinner, but a dessert is usually sweet, like oatmeal cookies or apple pie. Here are a couple of delicious examples:

"True to its classic form, the dessert consisted of two layers of sponge cake, a thick center of yellow cream and a chocolate-frosted top." (Wall Street Journal)

So remember, don't get a desert mixed up with your dessert or else you'll wind up with sand in your strawberry shortcake. See what we did there?

A desert is a very dry area of land where few plants and animals can live. If you find yourself stranded in the middle of the desert, you'll have no company except for the occasional lizard or scorpion. Continue reading...

Served as the last course of a meal, a dessert is often sweet, like cake or pie. If you have a sweet tooth, you may wish it were the only course of the meal. Continue reading...



didactic/
pedantic

Both words relate to teaching, but didactic teaches a lesson and pedantic just shows off the facts.

Didactic  describes anything that tries to teach a lesson, sometimes a moral one. People don't always want a lesson. Didactic comes from the Greek didaktikos for "apt at teaching." Although being didactic is perfect for a teacher, it can be annoying when movies and books get into teacher mode. See below:

"Being Here is tough to absorb in one take, and it borders on being too didactic." (New York Times)

"It's not didactic or propagandistic in its approach, but it's honest. It makes you want to know more. It makes you want to get involved." (Washington Post)

Didactic also refers to a method of teaching that involves repetition:

"This is unnecessarily repeated, but fortunately such didactic intrusions are kept to a minimum." (Los Angeles Times)

The word pedantic is from the Italian pedante for "teacher." What a coincidence. Teachers aren't usually pedantic, but  sticklers are. Pedantic music snobs list twenty bands from Iceland that you have to go listen to now. Pedantic grammar nerds say to never split an infinitive. Pedantic is not a compliment. Check out these examples:

"Tristram Shandy makes fun of nearly everything, but especially the pompous and pedantic." (Slate)

"I know that some readers may find my language-stickler columns pedantic, or, even worse, tedious." (The Guardian)

"Readers responded: They found this arbitrary, arrogant, pedantic and just plain wrong." (Washington Post)

It's cool if a teacher leads a didactic discussion on Hamlet, but it's not cool if the teacher's pet takes over with a pedantic rant about how it should always be referred to as The Tragedy of Hamlet, Prince of Denmark.

When people are didactic, they're teaching or instructing. This word is often used negatively for when someone is acting too much like a teacher. Continue reading...

There's nothing wrong with focusing on the details, but someone who is pedantic makes a big display of knowing obscure facts and details. Continue reading...



disassemble/
dissemble


Disassemble is to take something apart, like an old car motor, but dissemble is sneaky — it means to hide your true self, like the guy who said he was a mechanic but  had never actually seen a motor, much less put one back together.


Disassemble is formed from dis-, meaning reversal, and assemble, to put  together. Disassemble, then, is to take something apart, literally or  figuratively:


        Entering the  moon's orbit, the rocket was further disassembled enabling two Apollo  Astronauts to explore the lunar surface. (Scientific  American)


        Lawmakers are, of  course, free to disassemble their  Frankenbill and pass the measures separately. (Chicago Tribune)


        But Mr. Walker and  Republican leaders said disassembling unions was not the  point at all. (New York Times)


Dissemble,  which means to hide one's beliefs or feelings, has a less direct breakdown.  (Why would it be direct? It likes to hide!) It comes from the Latin dissimulare, meaning to conceal, from dis- for completely, and simulare meaning  pretend. If you completely pretend you believe something other than you really  do, you are dissembling:


        Pictures have  always dissembled — there are millions of snaps of miserable families  grinning bravely — but now they directly lie. (Guardian)


        Is this not the  curse of power, forever compelled to conceal and dissemble? (New York Times)


        A sweet religion,  indeed, that obliges men to dissemble and tell lies, both to God and man, for the salvation of their souls! (John Locke)


  Ditch the dis an it's easy to keep these two straight: (dis)assemble is the opposite of assemble, and (dis)semble is to not resemble yourself. 

The verb disassemble means to take something apart. It's one thing to disassemble a computer; it's a whole other thing to put it back together again. Continue reading...

To dissemble is to try to deceive someone. Your little brother tried to dissemble when you asked if he ate the last doughnut, but the chocolate icing on his face gave him away. Continue reading...



discomfit/
discomfort

To discomfit is to embarrass someone. Say it with a Southern accent while sipping sweet tea. Discomfort is a noun meaning uncomfortable,  like the feeling you get when you realize you put salt instead of sugar in  Mama's tea. 

Discomfit is a verb that began as "to  defeat in battle," but now it means to rattle or embarrass someone. It's so embarrassing  to lose! This "newer" definition (it's been in action since about  1400, says The Oxford English Dictionary) came to be when people got it  confused with discomfort. How embarrassing! Here are some discomfits undoing folks in the news:


    But today even the best zoos discomfit many  parents, this one included. (Time)


    At the same time, the Obama administration is  pressing for changes that could discomfit the king and his aides. (Los Angeles  Times)


Discomfort is a noun meaning  physical or mental distress. That's how it stays away from its sound-alike;  it's rarely used as a verb anymore. Like all nouns, you can put an a, an,  or the in front of it an it makes  sense:


    Yoga can help alleviate some of the discomforts of pregnancy and keep  mothers-to-be fit. (Fit Pregnancy)


    Nabokov said he sustained an injury during the first  period, played through the discomfort, but "Jack pulled the  trigger" to substitute DiPietro. (New  York Times)


  Use discomfit to embarrass; use discomfort for embarrassment. Taste that tea before you serve it if you want to avoid both. 

To discomfit someone is to make them feel uncomfortable or upset. An easy way to discomfit another person is to use the age-old, childish trick of ignoring them. (Of course, we’re sure you would never do that, right? Right?) Continue reading...

Discomfort is the feeling of irritation, soreness, or pain that, though not severe, is annoying. Every year, people who get a cold or the flu experience a few days of discomfort. Continue reading...



discreet/
discrete

Discreet means on the down low, under the radar, careful, but discrete means individual or detached. They come from the same ultimate source, the Latin discrētus, for separated or distinct, but discreet has taken its own advice and quietly gone its separate way.

Today discreet is to be politely private about something and to be aware of consequences if everyone finds out what you're doing. Be discreet when you eat the lollipop your mom gave you but not your sister, so you don't have to listen to a tantrum. Wealthy people often try to be discreet with their money, because they don't want everyone to know they're rich. When you're trying to be cool, and keep something quiet, you're being discreet:

A source said: "Wayne attracts a lot of attention and the millionaires attracted to the area like to be more discreet." (The Sun)

Sound Level: Quiet, with widely spaced tables allowing for discreet conversations. (Business Week)

Discrete remains closer to its roots, meaning individual, detached, separated:

It is far better to think of these as isolated, unpredictable, discrete events. (Salon)

Quantum theory is usually thought of as discrete; after all, that's what the word "quantum" connotes. (Scientific American)

So last year, when earthquakes were recorded in small, discrete clusters in north central Arkansas, researchers perked up. (New York Times)

Although discreet and discrete have separate (or discrete) meanings, they are often confused. Remember that the "ee's" in discreet hide together in the middle of the word, but the "t" in discrete separates them.

Discreet describes someone or something that is appropriately quiet, prudent, and restrained. If you are wearing a discreet gray suit, it is unlikely that anyone at that business meeting will notice you. Continue reading...

Discrete means separate or divided. A discrete unit is a separate part of something larger. A room is a discrete space within a house, just as the crankshaft is a discrete part of a car engine. Continue reading...



disillusion/
dissolution

To disillusion someone is to rid her of an illusion, like lifting up the curtain to show that the wizard is just a man. Dissolution, on the other hand, is when everything falls apart. Both are disappointing.

The verb disillusion needs an object, as in you have to disillusion someone. Toto accidently disillusions Dorothy of her belief in the magical wizard. (The word is more common as an adjective, as in poor disillusioned Dorothy.) It's also a noun, when it's a feeling of disillusion, a loss of enchantment. Here are two examples:

He has raised expectations so high that whatever he does as PM is bound to disillusion some.  (Ottawa Sun)

My disillusion was growing and I was relieved when they laid me off with a generous severance. (New Internationalist Magazine) 

Dissolution, always a noun, is like disintegration. There could be the dissolution of a marriage, band, political party — and if you're Edgar Allan Poe — human body. In "Masque of the Red Death," Poe describes the symptoms of the Red Death: "There were sharp pains, and sudden dizziness, and then profuse bleeding at the pores, with dissolution." Yikes. Most examples of dissolution aren't as exciting:

The singer's wife had filed for dissolution of marriage in September last year, according to San Diego Superior Court documents. (BBC)

Until its dissolution in January 1994, the Christian Democratic Party dominated, furnishing all but three postwar prime ministers. (New York Times)

Although the words sound alike, the difference is after the "dis" (meaning "not"): disillusion is not an illusion, and dissolution is not a solid solution, it breaks up like paper in water.

To disillusion is to make someone realize their belief isn't true. If your cousin believes that the Tooth Fairy will come in the night, take her tooth and sprinkle her with fairy dust. It would be too cruel to disillusion her. Continue reading...

The dissolution of a relationship means that it's broken up or ended. The dissolution of your band means you better get started on your solo album. Continue reading...



disinterested/
uninterested


  If you're disinterested, you're unbiased;  you're out of the loop. But if you're uninterested, you don't give a  hoot; you're bored. These two words have been duking it out, but the battle may  be over for uninterested. Heavyweight disinterested has  featherweight uninterested on the ropes. 

If you want a disinterested, or  unbiased opinion, don't ask your ex-boyfriend if you can ask his brother out. He will not be disinterested. Disinterested means impartial, having no  bias or profit from something:


    There is no  convincing evidence for this convoluted advice, disinterested researchers say. (New York Times)


Disinterested service is a virtue ordinary human intelligence cannot grasp. (F.E. Mills)

Uninterested means neutral or indifferent, having no interest in something. Once your former  sweetheart has a new girlfriend, he might be bored, or uninterested,  enough for you to ask him about his cute brother. Here are some uninterested examples:


    The coach had put  some thoughts on paper and gave his friend the name of a possible publisher who  turned out to be uninterested. (New York Times)


    "He was dedicated  to the automobile," Mr. Joyce said, and uninterested in mass transit. (New  York Times)


  If your ex is disinterested enough  to give you his brother's number, he's over you and unbiased. If the cute  brother is uninterested and doesn't call you back, then he's just not  into you. But know this: disinterested appears almost twice as often as uninterested,  and a quick scan shows that disinterested is frequently used to mean uninterested.Uninterested is down and will soon be counted out. Just like that date.

If you can't decide whether to purchase the shirt with orange polka dots or the purple paisley-patterned one, you might seek input from a disinterested, or unbiased, party (who will probably tell you not to buy either one). Continue reading...

Uninterested describes someone who doesn't pay attention or care. If you're uninterested in touring old homes and shopping for antiques, you might be bored on vacation with your aunt and her friends. Continue reading...



disperse/
disburse

To disperse is to scatter, and to disburse is to pay. Don’t get them mixed up — you don’t want your money to disperse!

Disperse is a little like dissipate. When clouds disperse, they dissolve or float away and the sun comes out. Crowds disperse when everyone goes their separate ways. To disperse information is to broadcast it. A sneeze helps disperse germs, so you should always cover your mouth and nose when you feel one coming on! Here are some other examples:

Scientists maintain it’s far less risky to be outside than indoors because virus droplets disperse in the fresh air, reducing the chances of COVID-19 transmission. (Seattle Times)

Hold on to your purse! To disburse is to distribute funds. You can find the Latin root bursa, for “purse,” in disburse and other words like bursar (“a treasurer of a college”) or reimburse (“to pay back”). Here’s disburse in the news:

Most companies disburse funds within two to three weeks, but you should get a payment deadline in your contract. (Washington Post)

To remember the difference, look at the letters: Disperse a party but disburse from a bank.

If someone wants to disburse funds to you, stick around — it means they're going to give you money! Continue reading...

To make a crowd at a party disperse, you could take away the food, turn off the music and ask for volunteers to clean up. Disperse is to spread out people or things, making them move in different directions. Continue reading...



dual/
duel


  Seeing double? Not quite! Dual is two, or  double, but a duel is a fight. If you're getting sick of your  fair-weather friend's dual personality, perhaps you should throw down  your glove and challenge him to a duel at high noon. 

Dual, which dates from the early 1600s, is borrowed from the Latin dualis, from duo, for two. Dual still means double or two similar parts:


    The ego becomes dual, one  part active, the other watching and judging. (Max Simon Nordau) 

Last night's game had kind of a dual purpose — playing Oregon and sending out this version of Husky Stadium. (Seattle  Times)

Duel once  referred to an arranged, formal contest to the death between two people,  preferably men with handlebar mustaches. These formal contests are no longer  practiced, so duel has broadened to mean any contest between two people,  teams, or even ideas:


    In early days a properly  regulated duel was an ordeal showing the judgment of heaven. (Max Simon  Nordau)

In a savage duel between the regime and Islamist guerrillas, entire villages were wiped out. (Business  Week)


    There are dueling pension propositions on Tuesday's ballot. (Washington Post)


  Save dual for double, for  things that come in pairs, like your hot/cold friend with the dual personality.  Use duel for an old timey sword fight, or any modern version of it.  Handlebar mustache not required. 

Dual means double, or having two elements. If you have a dual major, it means you're majoring in two subjects, like astronomy and microbiology. Continue reading...

A duel is a fight between two people, usually using swords or other weapons. If you tend to be a little cowardly, you're probably glad that people aren't expected to defend their honor with a duel these days. Continue reading...



economic/
economical


Economic is all about how money works, but something economical is a good deal. You might take an economic studiesclass to understand the  ebb and flow of cash in the world, but if you buy a used textbook for it,  you're being economical. 


Economic appeared in the late 1500s, referring to household management, but its sense of  relating to a country's wealth first appeared in the 1800s. It's still related  to economics (the study of the transfer of wealth) or economy (a  country's wealth), but not thrifty (that's the other one). Here are some economic examples:


        The  Fed said economic conditions will likely warrant "exceptionally low"  interest rates through at least mid-2013. (Business  Week)


        Some slowing is  expected in 2012 because of global economic woes. (New York Times)


  The word economical also showed up in the 1500s, referring to  household management, but it refers to being thrifty or not wasteful, which  is still the definition today:


        Not long after The New York Times profiled an inventive  and economical restaurant experiment taking place in Windsor  Terrace, Brooklyn, the experiment ended. (New  York Times)


        Electric lights are economical, clean, and give more light than gas. (Rose  Buhlig)


  If you want an adjective related  to the economy, economic is your word. If you want a word to describe something that saves money, like buying  used textbooks, use economical.

If you describe something as economic, then it relates to the economy. And the economy? It's all about money, honey. Continue reading...

Someone who is economical avoids wasting things, like money or food. So if someone sees you wrapping up a bite of food that could be part of tomorrow's lunch, don't let him call you "cheap." Tell him you are economical. Continue reading...



elusive/
illusive

An elusive fairy is one you can't catch, but an illusive one was never really there at all. It was just an illusion!

Anything elusive is hard to get a hold of. It eludes you. Existentialism, love, and small rodents are among things people find elusive. If you can't understand what "nothingness" is, find that special someone, or catch the little mouse who eats your cake at night, then those things are elusive. Some examples:

Predicting extreme events any further than 10 days in advance has long been an elusive goal for meteorologists. (Scientific American)

He proved an elusive foe for law enforcement. (Reuters)

Something illusive, on the other hand, is not real, even if it seems to be. The word illusive is used mostly in literature, where we find our favorite illusions. If flickering candlelight is casting scary shadows on the wall, don't worry, those are illusive villains. They aren't really there. Check out some examples from literature:

Then he knew it was an illusion of his eyes, straining suddenly in that illusive light. (Charles George Douglas Roberts)

But though all my rural visions had proved illusive, there were some very substantial realities. (Harriet Beecher Stowe)

Although both words can apply to things you don't have, don't let the difference be elusive! You can't quite catch something elusive, but illusive things are just illusions. The word illusive is less common. It likes to hang around the library, where it can be easily caught.

Things that are elusive are hard to find, pin down, or remember. They slip right out of your grasp. Continue reading...

If something misleads or deceives you, it is illusive. If you think you see a unicorn in your back yard, but it suddenly disappears, you can describe the vision as illusive. Continue reading...



emigrate/
immigrate/
migrate

Going somewhere? Emigrate means to leave one's country to live in another. Immigrate is to come into another country to live permanently. Migrate is to move, like birds in the winter.

The choice between emigrate, immigrate, and migrate depends on the sentence's point of view. Emigrate is to immigrate as go is to come. If the sentence is looking at the point of departure, use emigrate. The point of arrival? Immigrate. Talking about the actual process of moving? Use migrate.

Emigrate means you are exiting your current homeland:

People are always saying there's no quality of life in Russia, and everyone wants to emigrate," he said. (New York Times)

Immigrate means you are coming in to a country to live:

Citizens from 17 European Union countries were given freedom to immigrate to Switzerland in 2007. (Business Week)

Migrate means to move, like those crazy Monarch butterflies that migrate from Canada to Mexico and back. It doesn't have to be a permanent move, but migrate is more than a weekend away, and it's not just for butterflies. "Snowbirds" are people who migrate south for the winter and come back north when the snow melts, or someone might migrate to another part of the country for work or to be closer to family. Here are some examples:

Nevertheless, it has often been assumed that dinosaurs did migrate.(Scientific American)

People are prepared to travel and migrate within America. (Business Week)

If you have ants in your pants and you have to move, remember:

Emigrate is from the point of view of the departure. Think exit.

Immigrate is from the point of view of the destination. Think come in.

Migrate is all about the moving. Think move.

If you move to a different country, you emigrate. For example, if you emigrate from Canada and go to Italy, you aren't on vacation — you are making Italy your new home. Benvenuti! Continue reading...

When a person immigrates, he or she moves to a new country.  During the great wave of immigration between 1880 and 1924, over 25 million Europeans immigrated to the United States. Continue reading...

To migrate means to move from one place to another, sometimes part of a back-and-forth pattern, and sometimes to stay. Continue reading...



eminent/
imminent

No, it's not the name of the latest rapper from Detroit — eminent describes anyone who's famous. But imminent refers to something about to happen, like the next big thing's imminent rise to the top. These two words sound the same to some, but they're unrelated.

Someone who's eminent is totally rocking out. This eminent person is distinguished, grand, soaring high above the rest of us chumps. In legalese, eminent domain is when the government takes over private property for public use. Here are examples of both:

Johnson, Dr. Samuel: An eminent English essayist, poet, and lexicographer. (James Baldwin)

The eminent explorer had a bumper audience and a great reception, and was given an honorary degree by Convocation next day. (David Hunder-Blair)

Eminent domain laws generally allow for the confiscation of private property if taking it is judged to serve a larger public good. (New York Times)

Imminent describes something that's about to happen, and it's not always good. It can be positive, like a talented musician's imminent rise to stardom, but it's often bad, like a sick person's imminent death, or a city's imminent bankruptcy:

One official said that unless the city "hit the jackpot," bankruptcy was imminent. (New York Times)

Real Estate Alert reported last week that the deal was imminent. (Business Week)

At one point, some 750,000 Somalis had faced imminent starvation. (Scientific American)

To keep the two straight, remember that an eminent person is successful,like that rapper Eminem. Something imminentis going to happen in a minute.

Anyone highly regarded or prominent is eminent. Eminent people are very successful at their jobs. If you’ve heard of Neil deGrasse Tyson, it’s probably because he’s an eminent astrophysicist. Continue reading...

Something that is imminent is just about to happen: if you light a firecracker and then stick it down your pants, a very bad situation is imminent. Continue reading...



eminent/
imminent/
immanent

No, it's not the name of the latest rapper from Detroit, but it could describe one — eminent describes anyone who's famous. Imminent refers to something about to happen. And anything immanent (with an "a" in there) is inherent, like that good attitude you were born with.

Someone who's eminent is totally rocking out. This eminent person is distinguished, grand, soaring high above the rest of us. In legalese, eminent domain is when the government takes over private property for public use. Here are examples of both:

"Johnson, Dr. Samuel: An eminent English essayist, poet, and lexicographer." (James Baldwin)

"Eminent domain laws generally allow for the confiscation of private property if taking it is judged to serve a larger public good." ( New York Times)

Imminent  describes something that's about to happen, and it's not always good. It can be positive, like a talented musician's imminent rise to stardom, but it's often bad, like a sick person's imminent death, or a city's imminent bankruptcy:

"One official said that unless the city 'hit the jackpot,' bankruptcy was imminent." (New York Times)

"At one point, some 750,000 Somalis had faced imminent starvation." (Scientific American)

The less common word, immanent, often sneaks in where it doesn't belong. Immanent comes from the Latin immanens for "to remain in." It refers to a natural part of an organism or organization. When people talk about God as immanent, it means something closer to "omnipresent," as opposed to transcendent for "unknowable." It's a formal word, popular with philosophers and religious people:

"God is in all; He is over all; He is both immanent and transcendent. " (Kaufmann Kohler)

"But the naturalist sees the creative energy immanent in matter." (John Burroughs)

To keep them straight, remember that an eminent person is successful, like that rapper Eminem. Something imminent is going to happen in a minute. And immanent (with an "a") is all in your head.

Anyone highly regarded or prominent is eminent. Eminent people are very successful at their jobs. If you’ve heard of Neil deGrasse Tyson, it’s probably because he’s an eminent astrophysicist. Continue reading...

Something immanent is inherent in and spread throughout something else — it's innate, intrinsic and inborn. Philosophers might debate about whether generosity is an immanent trait or something that people are taught. Continue reading...

Something that is imminent is just about to happen: if you light a firecracker and then stick it down your pants, a very bad situation is imminent. Continue reading...



empathy/
sympathy


Empathy is heartbreaking — you experience  other people's pain and joy. Sympathy is easier because you just have to feel sorry for someone. Send a sympathy card if someone's cat died;  feel empathy if your cat died, too.


Empathy was first used to describe how a  viewer's appreciation of art depends on her ability to project her personality onto  the art. These days it applies to anything you can basically "project your  personality" on. When you feel what someone else feels, that's empathy. It's a good skill for doctors,  actors, and characters from Star Trek:


      Nearly all medical schools teach the importance of  listening to patients and showing empathy. (New York Times)

 "I've always thought of acting as more of an  exercise in empathy." (Edward  Norton)


In Star Trek: The Next Generation, Commander Deanna Troi was an empath: she  could psychically sense other people's emotions. She experienced their emotions  as they did.


Sympathy is an older word, from the Greek sympatheia, for "having a fellow feeling." It's a snuggly,  comforting word. It's nice to get sympathy if you're feeling under the weather. To feel sympathy for someone is to  feel bad for them:


    This  has already proved effective at drawing attention and sympathy. (Slate)


    Police show no sympathy for "polite bandit." (Chicago  Tribune)


    So  many dramas resort to cadging sympathy for their troubled  characters by killing off loved ones. (Time)

If you're feeling empathy, you're in (em) the feeling. If it's sympathy,  you're feeling sorry for someone.

Use empathy if you're looking for a noun meaning "the ability to identify with another's feelings." Continue reading...

Sympathy is a feeling of pity or sense of compassion — it's when you feel bad for someone else who's going through something hard. Continue reading...



endemic/
epidemic


Endemic and epidemic are both words that diseases love, but something endemic is found in a certain placeand is ongoing, and epidemic describes a disease that's widespread.


  A disease that is endemic is found in a certain geographic region or in a specific race of people.  Malaria is endemic to parts of Africa  because it's hot and skeeters love it. Tay-Sachs is a genetic disease endemic to Jews and French Canadians. On  the brighter side, a plant or animal can also be described as endemic to  a region. If it's in the system, it's endemic:


        Many relief  workers who came to Haiti lived in South Asia, where cholera was endemic.  (New York Times)


        Catalina endemic plants are species that occur  naturally on Catalina Island and nowhere else in the world. (Catalina Island Conservancy)


Epidemic describes a disease that is widespread, affecting an "atypically large  number of individuals within a population, community, or region at the same  time," according to the Merriam-Webster Medical Dictionary. The  disease, however eventually subsides. Here are some epidemics:


        The Sunshine Coast  is in the midst of a whooping cough epidemic with an average of three new cases presenting every day this year. (Sunshine Coast Daily)


        But we're still  talking about a huge epidemic in this country where  more than half a million babies are born each year preterm. (Time)


  An endemic disease is restricted to a place, as with malaria, or a  people, as with Tay-Sachs. An epidemic disease may happen in a specific place, but it can spread beyond that place, as  with asthma or AIDS.

If you want to underscore just how commonly found and present something is within a particular place, try the word endemic. The saguaro cactus is endemic, or native, to the American southwest — so watch out for its sharp spines when you're hiking in Arizona! Continue reading...

An epidemic is a disease that spreads rapidly among many people in a community at the same time. In the 1980s, the fast-spreading AIDS epidemic transformed life on our planet. Continue reading...



entitle/
title

To entitle means to give someone a rank or right,  like if your perfect attendance entitles you  to free ice cream at lunch. A title is  the name of something, like the title of  a song you wrote about ice cream.


  What  about that song — is it entitled or titled "Free Ice Cream at Lunch"?  There's the rub. The short answer: use either one! 


Entitle's main job is to give you a  right, like when you're entitled to  free snacks because you've done something to deserve it. If you seem to have to  right to everything, you're just entitled.  It also means to give something a title:  Your song is entitled "Free Ice Cream  at Lunch." Check it out:


      As all art collectors may, Mr. Lauder is entitled to deduct the full market value of artworks donated to museums. (New York Times)


      Marjorie Ingall is worried about raising "entitled,  bratty, ungrateful little weasels." (New  York Times)


  A title is a noun — it's the name of a book, a movie, or your new hit  single about frozen treats. To name such a thing, is to title it, so yes it can also be a verb (hence the confusion). Here  are some:


      Their report was titled: "Euro zone: Thinking the  unthinkable?" (Business Week)


      The distributor gave him idiot-proof instructions,  such as making sure pages had numbers and the title was on the  spine. (Washington Post)


  Sticklers  want entitle tobe  used only in the sense of giving someone a right, not for giving something a  name. Bah! As for your song, if you jazz up the title, it might be entitled "Punk  Rock Pickle Pink Ice Cream." Or not. You can get rid of the entitled/titled problem by dropping both  and letting the title speak for  itself.

Use the verb entitle to mean "give a right to." At some schools, being a senior might entitle students to go out for lunch on Fridays. Continue reading...

A title is typically the official part of your name, placed at the beginning to signify a certain status or function. So, do you prefer "Mr.," "Mrs.," "Dr." or "Ms"? Or perhaps you just go by "Grand Pooh-bah"? Continue reading...



entomology/
etymology


  Don't bug out! Entomology is the study of  insects, but etymology is the study of words. They sound similar and  both end in -logy, which means "the study of," but don't mix them up  unless you like completely confusing people.

Entomology comes from the French entomologie and the New Latin entomologia. These  come from the Greek éntomon, for insect, and logia, for study. Entomology, then, is the study of insects:


    From  the department of entomology you expect to learn something about the  troublesome insects, which are so universal an annoyance. (A.W. Latham)

Entomology:  that branch of Zoology that deals with insects and, specifically, the Hexapods.  (John B. Smith)


  The etymology of the word etymology is that it comes from the Old French ethimologie and the Latin etymologia. Both come from the Greek etymologia, from etymon, for "true  sense," and logos, word. Today's etymology is the study of a  word's history:


    Dictionaries take  decades to compile, while slang terms come in and out of fashion faster than  you can say etymology. (Time)

 In fact, Metcalf  devotes a whole chapter to the various false etymologies of  OK, including several you may have heard. (The Globe and Mail)


    Thinking about the etymology of these words made me think about exactly why we, as  designers, were originally inspired by these ideas. (Co. Design)


  Remember, entomology is  the study of insects, like ants. If you're talking about words and where  they came from, use etymology.

Entomology is the study of insects. If you want to know all about ants, beetles, and mosquitoes entomology is for you. Continue reading...

Since you're reading this, then you probably have some interest in etymology, because it's the study of the history and derivations of words. Continue reading...



envelop/
envelope

To envelop is  to surround something completely. But an envelope is a piece of paper you put your love note in and lick to seal. With enVElop, the accent is on the second syllable, while with ENvelope, the accent is on the first. 


Envelop means to wrap around something  completely, to surround, either literally or figuratively. Fog can envelop a city, but love might also envelop a person's mind. Here are some envelops in the wild:


    Gradually  this veil spread inland and quietly enveloped all things on shore. (Lillian Elizabeth Roy) 

Kenya  had been enveloped in violence following the contested presidential  elections in December 2007. (Forbes)

An envelope is a flat piece of paper used to enclose — or envelop — documents. To push the envelope means to approach the limits of something. You  might hear the envelope, please when you're waiting to find out who won  an Oscar. Here are some envelopes waiting to be opened:


    Related links in NPG Funding models can push the envelope,  but at what cost? (Nature)


    Mr.  Warner drew the letter from its envelope, began casually running  through it. (Inez Haynes Gillmore)

When  love envelops your brain, you might forget  to seal the envelope for your mushy  letter. If it falls out for all to see, embarrassment might envelop you!

When something envelops you, it wraps around you. The Snuggie Blanket is so popular because it envelops your body, leaving only your head uncovered. Sure, it looks dorky, but it keeps you extra warm. Continue reading...

An envelope is something that envelops, or wraps around. It usually refers to the thing you stick a stamp on and snail mail. Continue reading...



envy/
jealousy

It's no fun to feel envy or jealousy because  both make you feel inadequate. Envy is when you want what someone else has, but jealousy is when you're worried someone's trying to take what you have. If you want  your neighbor's new convertible, you feel envy.  If she takes your husband for a ride, you feel jealousy.

Envy requires two parties, like you and that neighbor, when you want her new car and  you wish you were the one riding around with the top down. You feel envy when you want something someone  else has:

Tall and lean, he is wearing blue jeans, tennis  shoes, a dark blazer and red tie with hair every sports anchor would envy.  (Chicago Tribune)

 "There  be many, Judith," said he, "who might envy you your health  and good spirits." (William Black)

Jealousy requires three parties, like  you, your neighbor, and your husband, when not only do you wish you had that  cool car, but you're worried your husband is going to ride off into the sunset  in it without you. Jealousy is  exciting because it shows up in lovers' triangles and Shakespeare's plays:


    In Shakespeare, Othello is doomed by jealousy,  Lear by pride. (Slate)


    The  peasant, mad with jealousy, ended by driving an awl into his chest. (Fyodor Dostoyevsky)

Professional jealousy, tortured artist blues,  Spinal Tap-ish excess and other clichés abound, but nobody seems to notice. (The Guardian)


  You  can feel envy about something you  don't have but want, but you feel jealousy over something you already have but are afraid of losing, like that husband  who's always hanging out next door.

Wanting what someone else has and resenting them for having it is envy. If your best friend comes to school with the silver backpack you’d had your eye on all summer, you want to be happy for her, instead you feel bitter envy. Continue reading...

Jealousy is that unpleasant emotion you feel when you think someone’s trying to take what’s yours. Jealousy might creep up on you if someone flirts with your sweetie or copies your unique style. Continue reading...



epidemic/
pandemic

An epidemic is a disease that spreads rapidly among many people in a community at the same time. In the 1980s, the fast-spreading AIDS epidemic transformed life on our planet. Continue reading...

Remember the 2009 swine flu? That was a pandemic — an illness that swept over much of the globe. Continue reading...



epigram/
epigraph


  An epigram is a little  poem or clever statement, but an epigraph is a specific kind of epigram:  a witty statement that's inscribed somewhere, such as on a building or at the  beginning of a chapter or book.


Epigrams are  short and often catchy, and sometimes a little sassy. Wits like Dorothy Parker  and Mark Twain were masters of the epigram:


      The first thing I  do in the morning is brush my teeth and sharpen my tongue. (Dorothy Parker)


      Censorship is  telling a man he can't eat steak because a baby can't chew it. (Mark Twain)


    An epigraph is a kind of epigram, but it's written on an object, like a coin, a building, or a book. An epigraph often comes at the start of a novel or short story, and gives the reader a  little hint about what's to come:


      A good epigraph should be more than mere adornment. (Guardian) 


      The epigraph to Shelley's novel is the fallen Adam's complaint to God in Book X of Paradise  Lost. (Independent)

 "Stop! It is  here, the empire of death,'' reads an epigraph from poet Jacques Delille  that has marked the Catacombs' entrance since they opened to the public in the  19th century. (Globe)


  An epigram is a funny  little remark or poem — you could get one by telegram! But an epigraph reminds you of your graphite pencil, because it's always written down.

An epigram is a short, clever remark. One of Oscar Wilde's many memorable epigrams is "I can resist everything but temptation." Continue reading...

An epigraph is an engraved inscription on a building or statue, or a quotation at the beginning of a piece of writing. Continue reading...



epitaph/
epithet


  An epitaph is written on a  tombstone. An epithet is a nickname or a description of someone.  Halloween graves often combine them: "Here lies Fearsome Frank, who bet that he  could rob a bank."


Epitaph is usually the words inscribed on the stone, but it can also be a memorial  statement about someone who has died. Epitaphs are usually grave (ha  ha), but old ones can sometimes be unintentionally funny, like this one: "Here  lies Lester Moore/Four slugs/From a forty-four/No less/No more." Here are some  other examples of epitaph:

 "Here lies  one whose name was writ in water," is the epitaph he composed for  his grave, in Rome. (New York Times)


      Her epitaph,  being written in brass instead of marble, has escaped the wear and tear of  nearly three centuries. (Hunter Joseph)


      He has picked out  a cemetery plot, selected his tombstone and written his epitaph. (New  York Times)


  An epithet is a  description of someone, often a nickname, like if you're tall and people call  you Daddy Long Legs. It's not necessarily an insult, but these days it's used  that way a lot, like a racial or sexist slur. It's the kind of thing people  sling at each other, like "red headed stepchild." An epithet can be  negative, but it doesn't have to be:


      According to  legend, it is the Golden State — an epithet that might originate from  the discovery of gold in California in 1848. (The Independent)

 Elizabeth Olsen  still needs to be described as "Mary-Kate and Ashley's younger  sister," but any day now she might shake that epithet. (New York  Magazine)


  Be wary if someone writes your epitaph,  after all, it'll be inscribed on your grave. But don't be afraid of an epithet,  or nickname, maybe they call you The Gorgeous Successful Person.

An epitaph is an inscription on a gravestone. Famous for his comedic jabs at the City of Brotherly Love, writer W.C. Fields once said he wanted "I'd rather be living in Philadelphia" as the epitaph on his tombstone. Continue reading...

The noun epithet is a descriptive nickname, such as "Richard the Lionhearted," or "Tommy the Terrible." When it takes a turn for the worse, it can also be a word or phrase that offends. Continue reading...



especially/
specially

The words especially and specially have just a hair's breadth of difference between them. Both can be used to mean "particularly." Especially tends to be more formal, while specially tends to be more informal:

Barney Frank can be ruthless in debate, especially when laying into opponents who try to evade the historical record.

This season, Essie Cosmetics is commemorating 2010 Breast Cancer Awareness month with specially created We Can Do It Pink!

But our words have finer points to them that are worthy of being understood. Especially carries with it a sense of something exceptional, implying that there is something else that is of lesser quality:

We came to win the game and I thought we played especially well in the first half.

Charlotte Daw Paulsen, a mezzo-soprano, as Jephtha's wife, was especially fine in her harrowing "Scenes of horror, scenes of woe."

Specially can refer to something with a distinct purpose, someone who stands apart from the rest, without insinuating that there is something or someone who is lesser:

Specially trained dogs may be useful in helping to calm autistic children.

Value Village's specially trained costume consultants will showcase the hottest costumes.

Now that you know the finer points, you can choose your words — especially especially and specially — carefully.

Especially describes something that can be singled out as better or more than. An especially tall building is extremely tall. Continue reading...

Specially means "for a special purpose." If you walk into a room that's been specially decorated for St. Patrick's Day, there is probably a lot of green involved, and a shamrock or two. Continue reading...



exalt/
exult


  To exalt, means to glorify or elevate something, but to exult is to rejoice. Exalt your favorite pro-wrestler, Jesus, or your status  in the world. Exult when you get the  last two tickets to see your favorite band. 


Exalt is a transitive verb, so it needs a direct  object: you have to exalt something.  If we glorify God, we exalt him. It  can also mean to heighten something, to increase its effects. You can exalt, or raise, the Virgin Mary, or a  level, like in these examples:


      His  devotional writings, which exalt Mary by superstitious tales  of miracles, were extremely popular in all Catholic countries. (J.H. Kurtz)

At a less exalted level, we buy and sell  attention all the time, usually as part of some other transaction. (Slate)


      I'm afraid, though, that very few people walk on  that exalted plane. (New York  Times)


  To exult (with a "u") is to whoop it up, celebrate, to be  happy. If you rejoice at your team's big win, you exult in it. It's an intransitive verb, so it doesn't need an object  — you exult all by yourself, any way  you want:


      Little wonder Ferry's fans were out in force  Tuesday, but they had little reason to exult as the show opened in  subdued style. (Chicago Tribune)


      We do have our problems and we worry and whine and  complain, but we also have to celebrate and exult.  (Associated Press)


      Coffers will bulge, fans will exult, civilization will fail to collapse. (New York Times)


  If  you think something is the best thing ever and you practically worship it, you exalt it. You have to exalt something. If you're just  thrilled, and your sentence doesn't require a direct object, choose exult instead.

You might like your manager, but if you exalt her, it means you really put her on a pedestal and treat her like royalty. Continue reading...

Sometimes you might feel so happy about something you could just burst. This is the time to exult, or rejoice, and you might show your great happiness by laughing, dancing, and shouting with pure joy. Continue reading...



exercise/
exorcise

While both words can refer to ways  to get rid of something — belly fat, Satan — that's where the similarities end. Exercise is physical activity but to exorcise is to cast out  evil. 

Exercise usually refers to working out:

Mrs. Obama  has said she wants to help today's youngsters become adults at a healthy weight  by eating better and getting more exercise.

Many  studies have linked exercise with improved brain health later in life.

It also means to use something, like  restraint, or you might even have warm-up exercises in music class. 

On the other hand, if you went to  see The Exorcist and expected a sports flick, you were in for a big  surprise. You'll have to trade in your sneakers for some holy water if you are  going to exorcise, orcast out the devil, like in these examples: 

Any  lingering Hampden Park ghosts were exorcised by within 34 ruthless  minutes.

Mr. and  Mrs. Metzler, who are devout Catholics, had Father Brown come to the house to exorcise the spirits that were tormenting them.

Although exorcise usually  refers to a religious ritual to get rid of actual demons, people often use it  to refer to emotions they'd like to purge:

In his  view, acting has lent Ms. Schnabel "a vehicle to both exercise, and exorcise,  these kinds of complicated demons."

In a way,  she figured, she'd get two things done at once — advocate for kids and exorcise her own demons.

The "o" in exorcise is like  the "o" in the oath when you vow to rid someone of evil. Don't get the  two words mixed up, most demons don't respond to jazzercise.

Exercise is physical activity, like an exercise class, or the act of practicing anything — like people who exercise caution while crossing the street. Continue reading...

To exorcise is to cast out a devil or evil spirit, using prayer and other religious tools. You're probably familiar with the name of the person who does this: an exorcist. Don't try to exorcise a demon yourself. Call an exorcist. Continue reading...



expedient/
expeditious

Something expedient is helpful to you. If you vote your friend in for student body president just because you know she'll hook you up — that's an expedient choice. But expeditious is speedy, like your expeditious exit from the school cafeteria after you spilled spaghetti and meatballs all over your shirt.

Expedient describes a politically advantageous choice. Expedient also describes something that's good for you or something that's useful. It dates back to the 1400s and has its roots in Old French (expedient) and Latin (expedientem). Here are some expedient examples:

Should the government, which promised to protect airline passengers last year, do the expedient thing — or the right thing? (Seattle Times)

But Mr. Kim's defiance, at times unshakeable, has been known to soften when politically expedient. (New York Times)

On the other hand, expeditious isn't up to anything, it just means speedy or prompt. Expeditious entered English in the late 1400s via expedition, which also has roots in Old French and Latin. If you want to speed things up, use expeditious:

Mr. Fine remains hopeful of a credible and expeditious review of the relevant issues by law enforcement authorities. (Seattle Times)

The bill was given an expeditious passage as the Senate suspended order 79 of its standing rules to amend the National Minimum Wage Act. (All Africa)

Although expedient and expeditious come from the same Latin root word for "to make ready or to prompt," they parted ways by the 1600s, when expedient became self-serving. Use expedient for "advantageous" and expeditious for "speedy," like how fast you plan for an expedition to Antarctica, or across the street.

The adjective expedient describes something that provides an easy way to achieve a goal or result, but it's not necessarily a moral solution. Continue reading...

Anything expeditious is speedy and efficient. People like shortcuts because they are expeditious. Continue reading...



extant/
extent


  They sounds similar and  both have exes, but extant means "still here," and extent refers to "the  range of something." People get them mixed up to a certain extent.

Extant is something that's still around — you're surprised it's not extinct. It's more  than just existing but also surviving when others have not. Here are some extant examples (yes, they're still  here):


    The roots, stumps, trunks, and  foliage found in bogs are recognized as belonging to still extant species. (George P. Marsh)

He wrote in Latin an incorrect  history of England, which is still extant. (Thomas Cantrell Dugdale)

Extent (with an e) means  the range of something. Extent can also refer to a degree of something,  such as goal achievement. Extent is also the space something covers or  takes up. You might see the phrase to a  lesser extent (not as much), or greater  extent (more). Two is the extent of  the examples below:


    One's tongue slips in a longer  speech to such an extent that the last word of the intended speech is said too  soon. (Sigmund Freud)

He says he even sympathizes, at  least to some extent, with the Occupy Wall Street protesters. (New York Times)

A helpful hint: something extant is still in existence,  but the extent of something is just  the range or limit, like the size, or extent,  of your tent.




Use the adjective extant to describe old things that are still around, like your extant diary from third grade or the only extant piece of pottery from certain craftspeople who lived hundreds of years ago. Continue reading...

The extent is the area something covers. That could be physical space or something like being prosecuted to the full extent of the law. Continue reading...



facetious/
factious/
fatuous

The word facetious describes something you don't take seriously. Remove the middle "e," and factious describes a dissenting group. And finally there's fatuous, which is a fancy way to say dumb.

Someone who is facetious (fuh-see-shus) is only joking. If you tell your mom you want Brussels sprouts with every meal, make sure it's clear you're being facetious if you actually don't like Barbie cabbage. Facetious remarks are sometimes inappropriate too. Facetious in the wild:

"Granted, many of the Lent-related Twitter posts are likely facetious, so the list is to be taken with a grain of salt." (Time)

"If you're going to be facetious, really pour on the sarcasm so that hardly anyone could mistake your tone." (Forbes)

A factious (fak-shus) group disagrees with the mainstream and breaks off into a smaller group of angry rebels. A factious group doesn't have to be angry, but it helps. It's a word often used in politics -- in fact, it comes from the Latin factionem for "political party."  Factious issues divide people. Examples:

"It was the arbitrary invention of a particular time and place — the factious and violent medieval church." (Time)

"He first of all required them to banish Fénelon from their house as being a factious and rebellious person." (Dawson, William LeSueur)

The word fatuous (fah-chus) means silly, foolish, and maybe a little bit smug. In a debate, you might call your opponent's response fatuous. Here are examples:

"They realized then what a silly, fatuous thing it was to do, going out and killing rare birds." (Scientific American)

"Not to mention his fatuous conflation of Marxism, Freemasonry and Judaism." (Salon)

Don't take anything facetious on its face because it's not serious. Reserve factious for factions. And fatuous? Totally foolish.

Don’t take a facetious comment seriously because it’s supposed to be funny. Anything facetious is a joke. If you've just won a hotdog-eating contest and someone asks if you'd like to go out for burgers, they’re probably being facetious. Continue reading...

A factious group is one that breaks away, or wants to. It’s often used in politics, where people separate into smaller like-minded groups. The Confederacy was factious — they wanted out of the Union, but we know how that turned out. Continue reading...

Fatuous means lacking intelligence. When your mother outlaws calling your brother stupid, use fatuous instead. Continue reading...



faint/
feint

Anything faint is barely there, but a feint is a fake out. If your understanding of these words is still somewhat faint, never fear! Just keep reading...

To feel faint is to feel weak, and if you feel really weak you might faint, or pass out. Faint also describes something dim and hard to see, like a distant light or even a ghost. And if you’re “faint of heart,” you’re a timid soul. Here are some examples of this word in the wild:

The noun feint, on the other hand, is a trick often used in sports. It’s when someone acts like they’re going to do one thing but then they do something else — like if a boxer looks like she’s about to punch you with a left hook but nabs you with a right jab instead. Feint can also be a verb, as when a goalie feints to the left but actually goes right. Like so:

He made two half-hearted feints toward the basket, hoping to catch Ben off balance and get an unchallenged set shot. (The Great Santini)

In the Ukrainian capital, Kyiv, the attack was seen more as a diplomatic feint than a military assault, an effort to gain leverage during talks to end the war. (New York Times)

	Mbappé cut in from the left and, after initially being tackled, he got the ball back off Kristoffer Olsson, feinted, and then curled the ball inside the post. (Washington Times)

These words sound the same, but remember that faint has an “ai,” like something as thin as "air," and feint has an “e” like "feign" or “pretend.”

 

Something faint has no courage or vigor. If you suddenly round the corner and see a gang of bullies staring straight at you, chances are you'll feel faint. Continue reading...

Did you ever tell your parents you were going off to school, grabbed your book bag, and headed out the door...only to spend the rest of the day hanging out with your friends? Well, that was a feint, a super sneaky move designed to fool someone. Continue reading...



farther/
further

Use the word farther when you mean physical distance, like if you run farther than your friend. Use further for basically everything else. Further refers to abstractions like ideas or thoughts.

Farther is more restrictive because it refers to physical distance. It’s got the word "far" in there to help you remember. Here are some examples:

"In fact, on every measure, those who run farther, faster or more frequently recorded a lower death rate than non-runners." (New York Times)

"The pilots traveled farther and longer in a gas balloon than anyone in history." (Washington Times)

Furthermore, further refers to figurative distance. It’s not the kind you measure with a ruler but like when you think further about something. It’s the older word of the two, and often does double duty. Here are some examples:

"But the agency sought to go further, by exploring the reasons for those deficiencies." (New York Times)

"The app takes the Tinder model one step further by actually optimizing possible matches according to consumption preferences." (Time)

Some people think farther and further are the same, but nothing could be further from the truth! (See what we did there?) Historically, they were interchangeable, but like friends growing further apart, they now each have their own meaning. Farther is used literally, and further is used figuratively.

Farther means a greater distance away. You thought you'd be able to hit that can with a rock, but it fell short, so you'll have to try throwing it farther. Continue reading...

If you ask your parents for money, they might say they need to think about it further and then ask you lots of questions. Further refers to figurative distance, like a thought you need more time on. Continue reading...



faze/
phase


  To faze is to disturb, bother, or embarrass, but a phase is a stage or step. It could faze your  family if your princess phase lasts  well into your college years.  


Faze entered English around 1830  through American English as a variant of feeze, to mean "frighten." It's  often in the negative, like when your mellow brother is unfazed by your crazy Cinderella costumes. Don't let these examples faze you:


      Gasser didn't seem fazed by his  teammates' early shooting woes. (Seattle  Times)


      Morgan doesn't seem fazed by Google  overwhelming influence in the tech world. (Forbes)


  A phase is a stage, like the phases of the moon or the awkward phase of teenage rebellion. As a verb, it means to do something in  stages, like to phase something in or  out: 


  Education officials are now considering phasing out the middle school grades and possibly housing a new district or charter  middle school in the same building. (New  York Times)


      We will finish Phase One, and then we will look  at Phase Two," says Peter Voser, Shell's chief executive officer.  (Business Week)


      I never know if musicians see bands going through  all these different phases the way outsiders or music  critics do. (Time)


  Confusing phase for faze is  an error that usage guru Bryan Garner notes as being at stage 2 of  language change: having spread to a "significant fraction of the language  community" but remaining "unacceptable in standard usage." So don't get them mixed up.


  To  keep them straight: something that fazes or bothers you might make you want to fight,  but please pass through your princess phase as soon as possible. 

If nothing can faze you, you are unflappable. Nothing bothers you, or gets you off your game. To faze is to disrupt or disturb. Continue reading...

A phase is a particular period of time, like someone whose "teenage rebellion" phase lasts well into her thirties. Continue reading...



ferment/
foment

When change is a brewin', remember: to ferment is to cause a chemical change to food or drink, like turning grapes into wine, but to foment is to stir up trouble, like turning a group of people into an angry mob.

Fermentation is a magical alchemy through which bacteria, yeast, and time turn barley into beer, cabbage into kimchi or sauerkraut, and milk into kefir. To ferment is to effect that change. Since ferment describes a process, it's often used in the form of fermented or fermenting. Fermented grapes = wine.

To ferment can also mean to stir up. When you ferment something, you agitate it, you work it up, and then it changes. You can ferment people, too! An inspiring leader might ferment a revolution! See the word in action:

Thus campaigns demonstrate that creationists threaten the creative ferment that produces social improvement. (Washington Post)

Miso is a fermented soy product rich in probiotic cultures, which are essential for immune health. (US News)

Elephants in southern Africa often binge on the naturally fermenting fruit of the marula tree and lumber unsteadily away afterward. (Wall Street Journal)

Foment is similar to ferment in the sense of stirring up people, but it's always bad. To foment is to cause trouble.

The word's Latin roots mean to apply a warm compress, and it can still be used that way, but usually it's more like slapping someone with a towel dipped in hot water — start fighting! Here are some examples from the news:

We want you to model interpersonal reconciliation rather than foment personal conflict. (Time)

They said they would use their strategic reach and inspirational force to foment domestic attacks in the United States, and they did in San Bernardino. (US News)

It can even foment terrorism as people give up hope in good and honest government. (BBC)

So, use ferment when discussing drunk elephants and happy sports fans, and foment for angry rebellions. It's what bad guys do, and not to food.

The word ferment means a commotion or excitement. Consider that the fermentation that turns juice or grain into alcohol is the result of the agitated development of bacteria, and then you can better appreciate the word's meaning. Continue reading...

Stand outside the school cafeteria passing out flyers with nutritional details on school food, and you may foment a revolution — foment means stirring up something undesirable, such as trouble. Continue reading...



fictional/
fictitious/
fictive

Fictional, fictive, and fictitious all branch off the "fiction" tree, but fictional is literary, fictive is specific, and fictitious is just plain fake.

The word fictional is like "pretend" with a literary bent. Jay Gatsby is a fictional character. Novels, short stories, and plays are fictional, or made-up, but there are also fictional TV shows and movies. Examples of the word:

"The author has come under fire for equating Navajo religious beliefs with the world of her fictional Harry Potter characters." (National Geographic)

"As President Frank Underwood on 'House of Cards,' Kevin Spacey is deft at playing fictional presidents." (Washington Times)

The less common word fictive describes a specific thing created by the imagination. Your pets might be your fictive audience when you practice for the talent show. If you call your dad's best friend your uncle, that's a fictive kinship — there's a little invention. Fictive in action:

"The children were then told that the adults didn't have time to distribute the rest of their stickers to other kids in a fictive class." (Science Magazine)

"I can't claim any fictive kinship here — I only met him for a couple hours." (Los Angeles Times)

Anything fictitious is also made up, but often with trickery in mind. If you tell the coffee barista that your name is Picklehead Sunshine, then you gave a fictitious name. (Unless you're reading this, Pickles.) In The Talented Mr. Ripley, Tom takes on a fictitious identity when he pretends to be Dickie, a man he murdered. Other examples:

"She said she signed a fictitious contract with the company but never worked for them." (BBC)

"Authorities say the suspects opened accounts online by pairing real Social Security numbers with fictitious  names and birth dates." (Washington Times)

These three words love fiction but each in its own way. Fictional loves books and plays, fictive loves the imagination, and fictitious loves lies!

Something fictional has been invented, most likely for a book, play, or movie. But if you're really self-centered, you might think a fictional story is actually about you. Continue reading...

Fictitious means made up, or imaginary. No matter how real Scarlett O'Hara might seem in "Gone With the Wind," she's a fictitious character invented by author Margaret Mitchell. Continue reading...

Something fictive is made up, straight from someone's imagination. A con artist might create a fictive persona in order to dupe a rich heiress. Continue reading...



figuratively/
literally


Figuratively means  metaphorically, and literally describes something that actually happened. If you say that a guitar solo literally blew your head off, your head  should not be attached to your body.

Most  of us were taught that figuratively means something other than literal,  and that literally means "actually" or "exactly." Somewhere along the  line, literally began to be used as, well, figuratively, like this:


    But they're also going to create literally a tidal wave of data. (Washington  Post)


  There  wasn't an actual tidal wave, just a lot of data. Here are some examples that  make word nerds literally smile:


    Today,  protesters literally occupy Wall Street, camping in Zuccotti Park at the  heart of New York's financial district. (Washington  Post) 


  They're  really, actually there. 


    People can literally drown in their own body  fluids. (Scientific American)

 "We literally had fish blood running through the parking lot," he says. (Forbes)


  Ew,  but true.


Figuratively is more imaginative, it's used  when you mean something didn't really happen. It's metaphorical, as in these  examples with boats and feathers: 


      Besides, figuratively speaking, they are still in the same boat. (Mayne Reid) 


      So Josh—as he figuratively put it—had not a  feather to fly with. (Burford Delannoy)


  Although literally has been horning in on figuratively's turf, they're really not  the same, in fact the two words are often go together to complete a picture:


      Watching a waterfall drowns out — literally and figuratively — everyday cares. (Seattle Times)


      "The Piano Lesson" tells a more  haunting story, both literally and figuratively. (New York Times)

Will  people understand you if you use literally when you mean figuratively?  Sure. Most people will recognize that when you say, "The guitar solo literally blew my head off" it was an awesome solo, but your  head is, in fact, still on your neck.  

The adverb figuratively describes something symbolic, not actual. If a friend invites you to tonight's concert but you already have plans with your family, you might say — figuratively — that your hands are tied. Continue reading...

The adverb literally means "actually," and we use it when we want others to know we're serious, not exaggerating or being metaphorical. Continue reading...



flair/
flare


Flair is a talent for something, like what the pro-wrestler Nature Boy Ric Flair had back  in the day. Flare is on a candle or  the shape of bell-bottoms that kids rocked back in the heyday of wrastlin'.


Flair is a noun meaning an aptitude or eagerness for something or a distinctive style.  You might have a flair for photography, wrestling, or dressing like a flapper. If you describe food as  having a certain flair, such as a  Latin flair, you mean it has the  distinctive style of Latin food. Flair isn't a synonym for flavor. Style is more than flavor. Here are some flairs, ta da:


      Charming and  gregarious with a flair for grand gestures, he was haunted by drug addiction. (New York Times)


      Nice has always  boasted an Italian flair; La Promenade respects that  tradition by serving firm pasta, an outlier in a world of overcooked French noodles.  (Business Week)


Flare has fun, too, in  many different ways. As a noun, flare is a shape that is wider at one  end, such as bellbottoms, also called flares. It can also be a flickering light, as with the flare of a match. To  flare might be widen or to suddenly burn. A disease can flare up, or  become worse, while your skirt can flare out, or widen. Flare on:


      One  oak is hollowed and flared at the bottom like an  arched, empty shell. (New York Times)


      Sudden anger flared up in the  girl's blue eyes, though, he knew it was not directed against him. (Harold Bindloss)

If  you're not sure which f-word you want, choose flare. After all, flair just refers to that special something, it's restricted to being a noun that  means stylishness or an aptitude for something. Flare means everything else! (Almost) 

Use the word flair to refer to someone’s knack or natural talent for something. Someone might have a flair for throwing fantastic parties, or a flair for solving complex math problems. Continue reading...

A flare is a sudden burst of light. The flare of a lit match in the dark night is strangely beautiful. Continue reading...



flaunt/
flout


Flaunt is to show off, but flout is  to ignore the rules. Rebels do both — they flaunt their new pink motorcycles  by popping a wheelie, and flout the law by running a red light.


Flaunt means to work it, to preen like a peacock. You could flaunt your new Harley, your wealth, or  even your bright colors:


        Prosperous  Chinese are less shy about flaunting their wealth than people  in other countries. (Economist)

Daffodils flaunted golden cups at their more gorgeous neighbors, the tulips. (Lucy Foster Madison)

Flout, on the other hand, means to show a blatant disregard or  contempt for. If you scoff when told what to do, you flout the rules. Here are some rules being flouted in the news:


        In other words, the euro zone is based on a  gentleman's agreement that's widely flouted. (Salon)


        Baseball's rulebook is routinely ignored, flouted and evaded. (New York Times) 


  The problem is that people use flout to mean flaunt. If you mix up the words in the sentences  above, the meaning changes. It would be weird to flout your wealth or  your golden color. Garner's  Modern American Usage identifies this error at widespread: it can be seen in the  writing of well-educated people. However, Garner advises (and we concur) that  the distinction between flaunt and flout be preserved.

Flaunt is "to display proudly or show off," like when you flaunt your new Italian leather jacket by wearing it to the beach and pretending you're cold to make sure everyone sees it. Continue reading...

To flout is to scorn or show contempt for. "I flout the law and the concept of civilian safety by making a concerted effort to jaywalk every time I cross a street." Continue reading...



flounder/
founder

To flounder is to struggle, but to founder is to sink like a stone and  fail. Both are fun as nouns, not so fun as verbs.


  A flounder is a fish, but as a verb, it  means to blunder about, to be in serious trouble. In the following examples,  something is struggling but hasn't completely failed:


    He  set out for it, limping, while the sharp gravel rolled under his bleeding feet  as he floundered up the climbing trail. (Harold Bindloss)

It is a war that has floundered for nine years without a rational strategy and may  endure for another decade. (Sydney  Morning Herald)


    Just as he turned around that floundering business, he suggests, so too could he reverse the country's sagging fortunes  as its chief executive. (Washington Post)


  A founder is someone who starts  something, but as a verb, founder literally  means "to sink." Figuratively, it's "to collapse or fail completely." Here are  some examples of sinking and failing: 


    Pratt resisted the impulse of most Mormons to head  back to the foundering ship. (Salt Lake Tribune)


    Xinhua, in an English-language commentary, said  China could not stand by while its largest trading partner foundered. (Reuters)


    Yet negotiations over new gas contracts have foundered. (Economist)


Flounder and founder are happy little nouns that don't get mixed up. But it all  falls apart when they're verbs — if you're floundering,  you're struggling. If you're foundering,  you're failing completely. You're sunk! You can't even hold onto the letter l.

A flounder is a flat fish with both eyes on one side of its head; and, as a verb, to flounder is to wobble around like a fish out of water. Continue reading...

The person who creates an organization or a company is known as the founder. Founder is also a verb meaning "fail miserably," which is something a company's founder hopes the company will never do. Continue reading...



formerly/
formally


Formerly is  something that happened before, like when a pop star changed his name to a  squiggle, he became known as The Artist Formerly Known as Prince. But formally comes  from formal, or fancy, like the prom.


Former is at the root of formerly, referring to something that occurred earlier. If you changed your name, you'd  be referred to as formerly known as  whatever-your-name-used-to-be. It's not just for pop stars. If you want a word  that means in the past or before, formerly fits the bill: 


        Movies, books, television shows, the journalistic  outlets formerly known as newspapers, podcasts, YouTube videos, actual  museums, tweets—they all comprise the noise. (Slate)


        Erskine Bowles, formerly President Bill Clinton's  chief of staff, said, "I'm worried you're going to fail." (Business Week)


  At  the root of formally is formal, an adjective that describes  something as following custom, regulations, or ceremonies. You might speak formally during your speech, but chat  casually with everyone after. Formally describes  something official:


        Delaware spent years piloting and fine-tuning their  system before putting it in place formally state-wide. (Washington Post)


        The current council will formally disband  within the next few days. (Time)


  Remember  where these two words came from and you'll keep them straight: formerly former, and formally formal.

Formally describes something done according to an established custom, like dressing formally for dinner with the President, as people always have done. Continue reading...

Use the adverb formerly to describe something that happened earlier. A history teacher might explain that the city of Istanbul was formerly known as Constantinople. Continue reading...



formidable/
formative

Formidable describes a foe you're slightly afraid of, but formative describes what formed you. Perhaps a formidable gym teacher told you to get the lead out during your formative years in grade school, and now you're a world-class athlete. (Or a bookworm, depending on how you react to formidable foes.)

If you're a software designer, Microsoft is a formidable opponent. Such an enemy is one you dread, or perhaps respect or are awed by, because of its power, size, or capabilities. If you have a formidable vocabulary, you have a lot of words to choose from:

"A really formidable fighter can be worth more than a horse," he said. (New York Times)

Temple turned out to be more formidable than most expected. (Washington Post)

Heath Shuler is taking on an even more formidable opponent: House Speaker Nancy Pelosi. (Knoxville News)

Something formative shapes or forms a person or thing. Your early years are generally considered formative because they greatly influence who you are. Let's form an idea from some examples:

Psychologists have always stressed the formative influence of parents, but siblings have been studied less. (New York Times)

Marc Webb's film explores the formative years of Peter Parker, previously played on screen by Tobey Maguire. (BBC)

Naturally, he has formative memories built around the intersection of the team with his life. (Seattle Times)

Remember: your formative period was when you were learning to become a formidable foe for words with unruly definitions. And mean gym teachers.

Formative is a word that describes something that made you who you are. You might call your adolescence your formative years because that time period had such a strong influence on the rest of your life. Continue reading...

People who are formidable inspire fear and respect thanks to their size, or special ability, or unusual  qualities. If you're a wildly popular celebrity, you probably don't go anywhere without a formidable bodyguard. Continue reading...



fortunate/
fortuitous


  Get our your lucky rabbit's foot! Fortunate is lucky, but fortuitous means by chance or accident.  Silly rabbit, these words aren't the same.


Fortunate means having good fortune that you're born with or win somehow. You're fortunate if you're rich, good looking, and in love. Here are some examples full of  fortunes:


      Let's say you are fortunate enough to have a good job and some savings. (Business Week)


      More fortunate refugees  have been taken in by local families. (Reuters)


Fortuitous traditionally refers to something that happens by accident or chance — either  good or bad. It descends from the Latin forte, meaning "by chance."  People often use fortuitous to mean lucky because they want to sound  fancy, but you don't have to be one of them. Let's stumble upon these fortuitous examples:


      Meetings with other individuals  in the course of foraging, basking, or seeking shelter, are fortuitous and  have no social significance. (John M. Legler)

There are also fortuitous street finds, like the Eames lounge chairs he discovered near their  apartment in Greenwich Village. (New York Times)


Fortuitous has also been used to mean fortunate for so long that the meaning is  morphing. Fortuitous is still separate from fortunate, though —  it's closer to serendipity. The usage guru Bryan A. Garner  notes that this usage of fortuitous is at stage 3 in his Language Change  Index: "the form becomes commonplace even among many well-educated people  but is still avoided in careful usage." 


  Don't  thank that rabbit foot for your being so fortunate; after all, it wasn't  so lucky for the rabbit. But if you're superstitious, it's fortuitous that you found it right before you bought that lottery ticket. 

Fortuitous means by chance, like a lucky accident. If you and your best friend's families happen to go on vacation to the same place at the same time, that’s a fortuitous coincidence! Continue reading...

If you are lucky, you are fortunate. You can be fortunate to have avoided something terrible and you can be fortunate to have acquired, won, or been bestowed with something better than those around you, like wealth and good looks. Continue reading...



gambit/
gamut

A gambit is a kind of sacrifice, while a gamut is a range. Your offer to do more chores might be a gambit to get a higher allowance — but if your parents simply pile on more tasks without offering more cash, your feelings might run the gamut from sad to angrily disappointed.

A gambit is an opening remark or offer that you hope will help you later. It came into English as a chess term, as in the Queen's gambit, an opening move in which you sacrifice a Queen's pawn in order to set up a win later on. This word has since moved beyond the chess board, as in these examples:

Gamut, on the other hand, is a range from one extreme to the other. It originally meant the lowest musical note on the scale but now it refers to all the notes from low to high (or high to low) — or to any similar range. These days, it's most often used in the phrase "run the gamut," as in the following examples:

Residents run the gamut from young families to retirees. (Washington Post)

To remember the difference, a gambit is like a tricky bet, and gamut has a "u" for run the gamut.

A gambit is a strategic move, often in chess but also in politics or business, where a player sacrifices something up front for future gain. Continue reading...

A visit with a long-lost cousin might arouse emotions that run the gamut of from joy to nostalgia to sorrow. A gamut is a full or complete range. Continue reading...



gibe/
jibe


To gibe is to sneer or heckle, but to jibe is to agree. Funny thing is, though, jibe is an alternate spelling of gibe, so surprise! People get them mixed up.


A gibe is a pointy  comment, an insult, a verbal thump on the forehead. Despite being taunted, gibe hasn't changed in years — since the 1500s it's been a verb meaning, "to  make a remark that is taunting or sarcastic." Soon after, gibe was used  as a noun referring to the remark. The etymology is uncertain, though it could  be borrowed from the Middle French giber, meaning to handle roughly.  Here are some gibes in context:


    The  last sentence was spoken in taunting tones, and Slade's face showed that the gibe had gone home. (Herman Landon)

Dr.  Prince walked off very triumphantly after this parting gibe. (E.M. Delafield)


Jibe is a two-headed  verb:it means to agree, but it's also a nautical term meaning to shift  a sail on a ship. (This nautical jibe is spelled gybe in British  English). Here are some jibes agreeably appearing in sentences:

 "We  thought about getting married in Massachusetts, but it just didn't seem to jibe right," said Dorr. (Salon)


    The drop in  jobless rate doesn't jibe with recent job gains. (Wall Street Journal)


    With a bit of  practice, you can steer, turn, tack, and jibe a boat with just her  sails. (John Jamieson)


  Should you use jibe as an  alternate spelling of gibe? No. Just don't gibe, or pick on,people  who do, instead just jibe with them and admit it's accepted in some  dictionaries.

"Loser! Bonehead!" the kids shouted, tossing those words and other gibes at the people who offered themselves up to the annual humiliation of the harvest-fest dunk-tank. A gibe is an insulting comment. To gibe is to insult. Continue reading...

To jibe with someone is to agree with them. Jibe can also mean “be compatible with or similar to.” If two people jibe, they get along quite well. Continue reading...



gig/
jig

Gig  with a hard "g" is a job. Jig, on the other hand, is a dance. The kind a band might do when they land a gig headlining Madison Square Garden.

A gig is basically freelance job. The word comes from jazz and often refers to a musical performance. If your band has a gig, you could say you're gigging. It's also short for "gigabyte," a unit of measurement in computer land. Gig likes to get around:

"Eagles of Death Metal's frontman has said he feels a deep responsibility to resume the gig which came under attack from terrorists." (BBC)

"He eventually retired from his job as an EMS for the Baltimore fire department and found a teaching gig near Hampton." (Washington Post)

"They have one job or two—or else they race from gig to gig and chore to chore as rapidly as they can." (New Yorker)

A jig has roots in traditional Irish folk dancing. Jig is also the name of the kind of song that you dance a jig to. Is a jig also a fishing lure? Sure! And, it's the name of a tool that comes in handy if you're making a jigsaw puzzle. It used to mean "trick," so if you catch someone breaking a rule, you tell 'em "the jig is up." Examples:

"It prompted Garcia to dance a jig of delight on the green." (New York Times)

"A new law goes into effect June 1 prohibiting the sale or use of lead sinkers and jigs that weigh less than an ounce." (Washington Times)

"There was also a less complex dolly jig designed to make a small doll dance." (Washington Times)

If you get them mixed up, remember that gig usually has a hard "g" for cold hard cash, and a jig makes people feel jolly.

A gig is a band's musical performance or an appointment for such a performance. Your band's first gig might be playing at a high school prom. Continue reading...

A jig is a lively, festive kind of dance. When you do a jig, you spend a lot of time hopping, kicking, and shuffling your feet. Continue reading...



gorilla/
guerrilla


  You  might see a gorilla in a zoo, but a guerrilla (sometimes spelled with one "r"), is someone who belongs  to a group of independent fighters. If you remember your high school Spanish,  you'll know the difference.


  A gorilla is a type of large African  ape. Sure they  fight, but that's not why they're called gorillas. When they show up in the news, they're usually just monkeying around:


      This short clip of a Silverback gorilla in Kent  walking upright on his hind legs, like a human, has become an internet  sensation. (BBC)


      Anaklet says we're going to surprise some gorillas eating breakfast. (Time)


  A guerrilla, on the other hand, is a  fighter who's a part of a rebellious group that's battling a government or  other authority, and likes to raid and ambush. The word has picked up a casual  meaning of describing anything that's meant to take you by surprise. Here are  some examples:


      Al-Shabab had spoken of a switch to guerilla warfare, which could mean more suicide bombings as well as grenade attacks and  land mines, he says. (BBC)


Guerrilla Marketing is a phrase coined by  Jay Conrad Levinson as a take-no-prisoners way of marketing. (Guerrilla Marketing)


  So  how will knowing your high school Spanish help you keep them straight? Guerrilla comes from the Spanish word  for a war made up of skirmishes. That guerilla is related to guerra for (you guessed it), war. If you remember that guerra is war and guerrilla is little war, you'll remember that in English, independent fighters are guerrillas, no matter how hairy they are.

A gorilla is the world's largest primate — the kind of great, powerful ape you might see on an African safari. Continue reading...

The word guerilla is another way to spell "guerrilla": a member of a small, loosely organized army that fights a larger, stronger force.  If you're a guerilla, you confront enemies unexpectedly and use tactics such as sabotage, raids, and ambushes. Continue reading...

If your brother says he’s going to become a guerrilla, he's not planning to become a hairy animal. Guerrilla fighters band together in a small underground army, usually trying to overcome a larger and more organized force. Continue reading...



grisly/
gristly/
grizzly

Blood, guts, and man-eaters, oh my! Faint of heart turn back now! Grisly means relating to horror or disgust, gristly means related to gristle or cartilage, and grizzly is a big ol' bear. That can eat you.

Grisly describes blood and guts, horror movie fodder, something totally repulsive. It shows up in these blood-curdling examples:

The grisly massacre — some bodies were grotesquely mutilated and defiled — shocked the country and made global headlines. (Time)

Television video showed a heavily damaged building and a grisly scene inside, with clothing and prayer mats scattered across a blood-splattered floor. (New York Times)

Gristly is gross, too, but it means related to gristle or cartilage, that yucky hard stuff in a chicken leg, for example, or the tough chewy part in any meat. Or person. Here are some gristly examples to gnaw on:

In a ham sandwich is a cold, pink punch in the face, an angry thing marbled with gristly neglect. (Guardian)

This is surrounded by a sheath of connective tissue, at first merely membranous, later becoming cartilaginous or gristly. (John Mason Tyler)

Grizzly refers to a species of brown bear found in North America. Grizzly can also refer to the color gray or gray hair: Grizzlies get their name from the white hairs that grow in their brown coats, making them look grizzled (streaked with gray).

He makes a face like a threatened grizzly bear: mouth wide open, snout muscles flexed, teeth bared. (New York Times)

All in all, if you're going out on a bear hunt, avoid grisly, gristly, and even grizzly bears. Hunt for teddy bears instead.

Grisly means disgusting and bloody, absolutely repulsive and horrible. There’s a wonderfully creepy movie about a man who suffers a grisly death at the hands of the grizzly bears he was studying. Continue reading...

Gristly means rubbery or full of cartilage. The hardest part of your trip to rural China might be graciously accepting and attempting to chew the gristly meat your hosts offer you. Continue reading...

A grizzly is a large North American species of bear also known as a silvertip bear. When you go camping and hiking in the western United States, park rangers might teach you what to do if you see a grizzly. Continue reading...



hale/
hail

Hale  describes someone hearty and healthy. Rarr. All hail the next word! To hail is to greet enthusiastically. And when it hails, ice falls from the sky and hits those hale people on the head.

Hale  means sturdy, the kind of people a certain prince wants at his masquerade party. In Edgar Allan Poe's "Masque of the Red Death," Prince Prospero invites 1,000 of his "hale and light-hearted" besties to his castle to cheat death. We know how that goes! These days the word hale often describes healthy older people, but anyone healthy can be hale, too. Observe:

"All these hale, silver-haired seniors, walking or jogging or cycling past the house." (New Yorker)

"Along with physical activity, your brain needs mental stimulation to stay hale and fit." (Time)

A less common use of hale is "to drag or force slowly," as in this example:

"She haled him into their special parlor, took his hat away from him, pulled out the most comfortable chair." (Charlotte Perkins Gilman)

Hail, on the other hand, has the "i" for "ice," but it's also a verb — raise your arm and hail a cab, hail the queen, or  hail a great success. Hail means to call attention to something. Hail the following examples!

"Beyoncé has hailed Jackson's influence in the past, saying 'Michael Jackson changed me, and helped me to become the artist I am.'" (BBC)

"Americans have come to rely on their smartphones to help them do seemingly everything, like hailing a taxi and comparing prices of dog food." (New York Times)

Hail  also means where you're from:

"Sanders hails from a neighboring state." (MSNBC)

To be hale is to be healthy. To hail is to call attention to a taxi or a king. Hail also has that "i" for ice!

Hail is when chunks of ice fall from the sky.  Also, to hail someone is to greet them or say good things about them. Or it can be a way to tell people of your homeland, as in: "I hail from the Moon." Continue reading...

If you're hale, you’re strong and in good health. Think "hale and hearty," the well-known phrase to describe someone who can lift a piano or work ten hours in a field without blinking an eye. Continue reading...



healthful/
healthy

Healthful describes something that will create good health, like apples, yoga, and fresh air. Healthy describes someone fit, trim, and utterly not sick.

Healthful food and exercise fills you full of health! Healthful has meant something that will create good health since 1398, and that remains the main definition of the word:

Choosing the most healthful foods for your family is no easy task. (Time)

Tilapia crusted in pulverized plantain chips, with sweet maduros on the side, was a relatively healthful departure. (New York Times)

Healthy is used to describe someone or something that enjoys all that good health. If you're healthy, whether you're a tree, a bank account, or a human, you're well, thank you very much. Here are some healthy tidbits from the news:

Any team interested in Sizemore will need to be convinced he is, finally, healthy again. (Washington Post)

Healthy forests are built to withstand severe natural disturbances. (New York Times)

This word pair, healthful and healthy, has been causing debate for over a century. The question is whether these adjectives can both be used to mean conducive to good health. This is what gets some word mavens' blood boiling. Healthy, they say, cannot be used to mean conducive to good health. But according to the Oxford English Dictionary, healthy has been a synonym for healthful since its earliest appearance in print... in 1552.

So it's OK to use healthy and healthful as synonyms for conducive to good health: have a healthy snack or a healthful one. But if you're referring to someone who enjoys good health, however, use healthy because it'd be weird to call a person healthful. Save healthful for the granola and healthy for your personal trainer.

Things that are healthful are good for your body, mind, or overall well-being. Your dinner of barbecued potato chips, ice cream, and slices of cheddar cheese might be delicious, but it's not very healthful. Continue reading...

Healthy means having good health. It's the opposite of sick, but also can mean "doing well" in a general sense. You can have a healthy attitude, or be served a healthy portion of food. Continue reading...



hero/
protagonist

A hero is the firefighter who pulls you out of a burning car. The protagonist is the main character in the story you write about it.

A hero saves the day. Like a protagonist, a hero can be the main character, but it has to be the good guy. A hero is inspiring; just ask David Bowie or the B-52s. A heroine is the female version, but the language is changing to allow a woman to be a hero, too, as in this example:

She is the latest Star Wars hero and a hit with old and new generations of fans. (The Guardian)

Here's another example of hero:

She called him a hero and that if not for him, the 30 people inside the consulate would not have made it out. ( Washington Post)

A protagonist is the main character in a drama. Unlike a hero, a protagonist does not always do the right thing. A protagonist isn't any ol' character — you wouldn't have tenprotagonists, just one. A protagonist can also be the main character in a real life event. Examples:

We are all the protagonists of our own story, aren't we? (Time)

It's so gratifying that eight of the films on my list, many of which were mainstream hits, feature a woman or girl as the protagonist. (Slate)

The difference is in their Greek roots — the word hero meant "demigod" and a protagonist meant the first person to address the chorus in a Greek drama, also known as the main character.

Yes, a hero is a kind of sandwich. But when David Bowie sings, “We can be heroes,” he’s not talking about sandwiches. He’s talking about the more popular kind of hero — the kind who saves your life! Continue reading...

A protagonist is the central character in a story: the protagonist of Huckleberry Finn is — guess who? — Huckleberry Finn. Continue reading...



historic/
historical

Something historic has a great importance to human history. Something historical is related to the past. People with big egos get them mixed up if they say they had a historic family background. Unless they helped win a war, it was probably just historical.

Historic describes something huge that happened in the past, something that affected human history. Historic things can be important figures, like Abraham Lincoln, or pivotal events, like the invention of the printing press. Historic lows are the lowest in history. Here are some historic examples from the news:

The last one closed in October as the museum moves historic objects out of its west wing for a major renovation beginning early next year.  (Washington Post)

A private funeral for the rap legend will be held at the historic Grace Baptist Church in Mount Vernon, just north of New York City. (Seattle Times)

Germans have little incentive to save, with interest rates at historic lows. (Business Week)

Something historical, like an event or an object, doesn't have to concern all of human history or be of worldwide importance, it's just something connected to the past, like these examples:

Other blow-by-blow historical Twitter efforts have run aground. (New York Times)

Kugel regularly furnished historical information that other Madoff employees used to fabricate trades, the government charged. (Washington Post)

Our package also included photos, video, story, historical timeline, readers' memories and polls. (Seattle Times)

The Battle for Bunker Hill was an important battle in the Revolutionary War, making it historic. While the battle for the last piece of your mom's chocolate cake might live in your family history as huge event, it's historical.

And by the way, if you pronounce the h- in either historic or historical, you should use a rather than an before it.

Something that's historic was important in its day and continues to be studied and remembered, like the historic integration of segregated schools and the historic March on Washington in 1963. Continue reading...

Use the adjective historical to describe something that happened in the past, like the historical details of your ancestors' immigration to the United States. Continue reading...



hoard/
horde


  To hoard is  to squirrel stuff away, like gold bricks or candy wrappers. A horde is a crowd of people, usually, but it  can also be a gang of mosquitoes, robots, or rabid zombie kittens. 


  If you gather all the info you can about hoard, and store it away for later,  you'll find it comes from the word for "hidden treasure." When you hoard something, you are collecting lots of material, usually of  value, in secret. You store these things in case you need them later. It's a noun and a verb. Hoarding canned goods and batteries before a hurricane is smart.  Not throwing out that hoard of old  playground equipment in your yard, not so smart. Here's some hoarding from the news:


      American firms continue to hoard cash and  overall bank deposits soar despite rock-bottom interest rates. (New York Times) 


      Clippings  and advertisements for free samples were hoarded and quickly posted. (Lauren Ann Isaacson)

Every  one is given at least one talent for use; not to hide and hoard away. (Louise Vescelius-Sheldon)

A horde, on the other hand, is a busy mob, like the one that chases Frankenstein's monster with torches. Hordes are often roving and mad. Horde is usually derogatory and should  be use with care. Here are some hordes from the news:

 In China, it means angry hordes parading  victims wearing dunce caps through the streets before stringing them up in  public squares. (Time)


      As darkness fell, women illuminated by wood fires  stirred vats of couscous and beef stew for the hordes of visitors.  (New York Times)


  The  only reason people get these words confused is that they sound. Remember,  there's an "a" in hoard and "gather." Horde is just a wild bunch of letters holding pitchforks. 

To hoard is to save something (or lots of things) for future use. Squirrels hoard nuts for the winter. Old ladies tend to hoard canned food and used plastic bags. Continue reading...

Use the word horde to describe a large crowd: “A horde of people followed the pop star as he left the airport in Helsinki.” Continue reading...



homonym/
homophone/
homograph

This word set can be confusing, even for word geeks. Let's start with the basics. A homograph is a word that has the same spelling as another word but has a different sound and a different meaning:

lead (to go in front of)/lead (a metal)

wind (to follow a course that is not straight)/wind (a gust of air)

bass (low, deep sound)/bass (a type of fish)

A homophone is a word that has the same sound as another word but has a different meaning. Homophones may or may not have the same spelling. Here are some examples:

to/two/too

there/their/they're

pray/prey

Not so bad, right? The ending –graph means drawn or written, so a homograph has the same spelling. The –phone ending means sound or voice, so a homophone has the same pronunciation. But here's where it gets tricky. Depending on whom you talk to, homonym means either:

A word that is spelled like another but has a different sound and meaning (homograph); a word that sounds like another but has a different spelling and meaning (homophone)

OR

A word that is spelled and pronounced like another but has a different meaning (homograph and homophone)

So does a homonym have to be both a homograph and a homophone, or can it be just one or the other? As with most things in life, it depends on whom you ask.

In the strictest sense, a homonym must be both a homograph and a homophone. So say many dictionaries. However, other dictionaries allow that a homonym can be a homograph or a homophone.

With so many notable resources pointing to the contrary, are we losing this strict meaning? What then will we call a word that is spelled and pronounced the same as another but has a different meaning? If homonym retains all these meanings, how will readers know what is actually meant?

The careful writer would do well to follow the strict sense, ensuring his meaning is understood immediately.

Use the noun homograph to talk about two words that are spelled the same but have different meanings and are sometimes pronounced differently — like sow, meaning "female pig," and sow, "to plant seeds." Continue reading...

Can you spot the homonyms in the sentence "The baseball pitcher drank a pitcher of water"? A homonym is a word that is said or spelled the same way as another word but has a different meaning. "Write” and “right” is a good example of a pair of homonyms. Continue reading...

A homophone is a word that sounds the same as another word but has a different meaning and/or spelling. “Flower” and “flour” are homophones because they are pronounced the same but you certainly can’t bake a cake using daffodils. Continue reading...



hone/
home


  To hone is to sharpen a  knife or perfect a skill. Home is where you live, where your stuff is,  is where the heart is, and all that. 


Hone in or hone in on, is an  eggcorn for home in on. (An eggcorn is a word accidently used for  another word that sounds similar, like saying eggcorn instead of acorn.)


Home in on (with an "m") means to move  toward an object or goal, like a missile zooming towards a target. Or as a  homing pigeon does, which is where the term comes from. Here are some examples:


      Another  international e-commerce site that has homed in on the Brazilian market  is farfetch.com. (New York Times)


      Bedbugs are active  at night, leaving their hiding places to home in on body warmth or  carbon dioxide to reach their victims. (Monsters and Critics)

Hone is to sharpen something, like  a blade or your attention in math class. The only reason people get it confused  with home is when hone horns in on home in. 

Although you can  make something pointy by honing, when you try to hit a target, you home in on it, like going home after a long day.

Home is where you live: your house, apartment, or condo. It's also the place we feel most comfortable, loved, and protected — where we most feel at home. Continue reading...

When you home in on something, you focus your attention on it. Your brother who is always reading probably homes in on bookstores when he visits a new place. Continue reading...

The verb hone means to sharpen skills. When you practice shooting baskets every day after school, you are honing your skills as a basketball player. Continue reading...



imply/
infer


Imply and infer are opposites, like a throw and a catch. To imply is to hint at  something, but to infer is to make an educated guess. The speaker does  the implying, and the listener does  the inferring.

To imply is to suggest  something indirectly. If you hand your friend a stack of napkins during dinner,  you imply that she needs them. Things can imply, too, like a  chimney that implies a fireplace. Check out these examples:





    Stern also implied the entire season might be  at risk. (Seattle Times)


    It isn't fair to imply that cardiovascular disease  is going away. (Nature) 


Infer is on the receiving end of imply, yet infer is often used to mean imply. To infer is to gather, deduce, or figure out.Writers tend to know how to use infer correctly:


    He talks about having led in the private sector but  voters have to infer too much about what that means. (Slate)


    They were also better at inferring feelings  from images of just the eyes. (Scientific  American)


    Yet  it must not be inferred that farming women are without mental ability or  common sense. (Sidney Lewis Gulick)

Like baseball? Theodore Bernstein, in his classic The Careful  Writer, gives us a way to keep imply and infer straight:  "The implier is the pitcher; the inferrer is the  catcher."

Imply means to express, suggest, or show something without stating it directly: A friend’s gruff manner would imply that she’s in a foul mood. Continue reading...

When you infer something, you read between the lines. To infer  is to make a well informed guess — if you see your mom’s bag on the table, you might infer that she’s home. Continue reading...



incredible/
incredulous

Incredible describes something you can't  believe because it's so right, like an incredible double rainbow. Incredulous describes  how you feel when you can't believe something because it's so wrong, like when  someone tells you leprechauns left two pots of gold.


  If  you pay attention to advertising, we live in an incredible world: Your local team had an incredible comeback. The latest movie is an incredible adventure. Wash your hair with this new shampoo and get incredible shine.


  It's  enough to make you incredulous, or  skeptical.


Incredible isn't just an empty modifier for  some new product. The adjective means that what it describes is hard to believe.  People use it to mean it's so awesome you can't even believe it. It's usually  something good, but bad stuff, like earthquakes, can be hard to believe, too:


      He is an incredible player: Hall of Fame  talent combined with world-class relentlessness. (New York Times)


      Japanese earthquake, tsunami causes incredible damage; effects felt in U.S.  (North Jefferson News)


      The brain drain out of rural America has been incredible.  (Reuters)


Incredulous describes someone unable to  believe something, someone being super skeptical. Put your fists on your hips  and say "no way!"when you're incredulous. It comes from the Latin incredulous,  meaning not believing. Incredulous describes people, and their reactions to things they can't believe:


      Asked whether writing the book forced him to seize  on moments that he might otherwise have passed over he looked incredulous.  (New York Times)


      "Do  you mean," he began, and paused, scrutinizing her tortured face with  disconcerted, incredulous eyes. (F.E.  Mills Young)

Something incredible is not credible; it's  unbelievable.People, rainbows,  and other things can be described as incredible (just check that shampoo  label), but only people can feel incredulous, or unbelieving and a  little irked.

If it's hard to believe and hard to wrap your head around, it just might be incredible. A hurricane in Kansas would certainly be incredible, but keeping your bedroom tidy all week counts too. Continue reading...

If you are incredulous that means you can't or won't believe something. If you tell people about those aliens you met the other night, they'll probably give you an incredulous look. Continue reading...



indeterminate/
indeterminable


      Understanding  the nuances of this word pair, indeterminate and indeterminable, hinges on understanding  the words' parts. The root word, determine, means to establish something. The prefix in- in this case means not. Both –ate and –able create adjectives, -ate meaning having the characteristics  of and –able meaning to be able.


Indeterminate, then, means not (in-) having the characteristics of (-ate) being fixed (determine): not fixed. Indefinite. Not determined. As in:


        Prisoners  on indeterminate sentences 'left in limbo' over parole dates 


        A man of indeterminate  age peeks out of a cut-glass window.


        For no discernibly  good reason, I am back on Twitter for an indeterminate period of time.


Indeterminable means not (in-) able to (-able) establish (determine): incapable of being fixed or  determined. Such as:


        This equated to 1082  votes for and 102 against, with two ballots indeterminable.


        However, there are  those movies that fall into that rare category of indeterminable.


        I said before how  if B existed inside of the mold by itself, B's size would be indeterminable because  it rests inside of infinity, which it can't be compared to.


      Remember: if something  isn't fixed, it's indeterminate. If it  can't be fixed, it's indeterminable.

The adjective indeterminable describes something that can't be known for sure, like what grade you would’ve gotten on a paper you never turned in. Continue reading...

Indeterminate means not known or decided. When someone contracts a rare stomach parasite but has not been traveling internationally, you might say it had indeterminate origins. Continue reading...



indict/
indite


    Ex-General Electric Executives Indited in Muni-Bond Scandal


    This particular man was only indited in his scam because he came  clean about it with Google in a blackmail scheme.


  Both  of these examples use indite to talk  about people being formally accused of lawbreaking. Unfortunately, the  sentences themselves break a rule of good writing: choose your words with care  (or perhaps a different rule: always have someone edit your work).


  What  those statements wanted was indict, a  homophone of indite that means to  formally accuse someone of lawbreaking:


      Prosecutors Delay Indictment of Man Arrested in Harlem NYPD Shootout


      Roger Clemens has now been indicted on charges he lied to  Congress under oath.


Indite, an uncommon word,  means to craft something, such as writing a sonnet or composing a musical  score. Most instances of it in a Google search bring up results like our first  ones or instances of language so mangled, one wonders why it was published at  all:


      Roger Clemmons is being indited for 6 counts of "lying to Congress".


      I would declare you indite your own; some another artefact would  be a writing ravishment and rattling unethical!


  Occasionally,  though, you can find an instance or two that use indite correctly, if in a consciously literary way:


      I hold indited epistles of hurting, of rejection, of sentences.


      Ofttimes musicians (especially in electronic music and hip  hop) hit a hard time grasping this distinction because they indite music while  they are producing it.




If you accuse someone of committing an offense, you indict them. A book that indicts the entire education system might lay out all the reasons that schools are failing kids. Continue reading...

The verb indite, rarely used today, means "compose" or "put down in writing," like when you find a quiet place to sit down with your notebook and pen and indite a journal entry or a first draft of a short story. Continue reading...



inflammable/
inflammatory

Inflammable and inflammatory can be confused with one another, but they also offer their own source of confusion with the prefix in-.

Inflammable refers to something that is easy to set on fire; something flammable. How can inflammable mean the same as flammable? True the prefix in- can mean not, as in inaccurate. But it can also be used as intensifier meaning in or into. It's that second prefix at work here. Something inflammable is something that's capable of not just being lit on fire but being easily lit on fire.

The fire created panic in the area as the spot is surrounded by dying units that produce highly inflammable chemicals.

However, we suspect that a spark in inflammable material or gas leakage might have caused the incident.

You can improvise your own personal ashtray by using an old tin of breath mints, or something similarly inflammable.

Inflammatory is also related to fire, although figuratively, and makes use of intensifier in-. Used literally, inflammatory describes something that is inflamed, that is, red, swollen, and hot. Muscle and tissue often become inflamed, and an inflammatory disease, such as arthritis, cause parts of the body to become so inflamed.

A novel treatment option for inflammatory diseases like rheumatoid arthritis seems to be underway.

Used figuratively, inflammatory describes something that incites anger or violence. It inflames people's emotions or responses.

This is false, inflammatory rhetoric.

The protestors have been known for their inflammatory remarks and signs.

The root of inflammable and inflammatory give you a clue to their meaning with the idea of fire. Inflammable is a literal fire: something that can be easily set on fire. Inflammatory is a figurative fire, whether with swollen joints or angry words.

Something that is inflammable can be set on fire easily. You dared not light a match after you accidentally spilled gasoline on yourself because you knew you were inflammable. Continue reading...

In medical terms, something that is inflammatory causes a local reaction that shows up by swelling, heat, pain, and redness. If you are stung by a bee, you may have an acute inflammatory reaction to the sting. Continue reading...



ingenious/
ingenuous

Anything ingenious is smart and clever, but ingenuous means innocent and naive. The ingenious villain in your favorite comic book series might come up with diabolical plots, while the ingenuous heroine doesn't suspect a thing.

Although the adjective ingenious is more closely related to the noun engine than to the word genius, a genius is likely to have ingenious ideas. Inventing a self-cleaning house ingenious. So is figuring out the math to get a rocket to the moon. Here are some inspiring examples:

Many libraries have found ingenious ways to keep their communities reading. (New York Times)

The division would be associated with lunar orbit rendezvous, one of the most ingenious and elegant solutions to the challenge of propelling extraordinarily heavy objects on the several-hundred-thousand-mile journey to the Moon and back. (Hidden Figures)

Innocently change second the “i” in ingenious to a “u” and you have the word ingenuous. Anything (or anyone) ingenuous is open, sincere, and a little naive. Its opposite is disingenuous, which means “insincere.” Here are some examples:

Now I realize the word “lie” implies knowing intent to mislead, as opposed to possibly ingenuous misstatement of fact. (Washington Post)

Straightforward individuals are frank, sincere, and ingenuous. (Scientific American)

Here’s an ingenious mnemonic to remember the difference between these commonly confused words: ingenious rhymes with genius, while ingenuous sounds more like genuine.

Something ingenious shows creativity and inventiveness. If someone compares you to Einstein, they're implying that you, too, are ingenious. Continue reading...

Someone who is ingenuous shows a childlike innocence, trust, and openness. One of the things kindergarten teachers value is the chance to work with kids while they're still relatively ingenuous — their open, trusting natures are a joy. Continue reading...



insidious/
invidious


  Neither insidious nor invidious are happy words: insidious describes something that lies in wait to get you,  and invidious is something offensive or defamatory. Cancer can be insidious, lurking in your body without  your knowing it. Invidious doesn't  hide; it's hateful right away.


Insidious didn't fall too far from the  tree – it comes directly from the Latin word insidiosus meaning "deceitful,  cunning, artful," from insidiae   "plot, snare, ambush."   Something insidious can even  be attractive while doing harm, like an insidious plot to befriend your crush's girlfriend, so you can break them up. But often  it's not attractive, just sneaky:


      Storms like Agnes and Irene are insidious, often  striking slowly over time in ways that can be unpredictable and far more  damaging than anticipated. (Salon)


      An insidious new email virus infiltrated high-profile US companies Thursday. (Toronto Star)


      Rather, it is the insidious silence and insensitivity that surrounds so many of the  most excruciating diseases of the mind that so often trigger suicide. (CNN)


Invidious comes from the Latin for ill will or envy. Some bouncers probably love the invidious task of not letting good-looking  people into their clubs. It's often paired with segregation, but other  things can be invidious as well:


      Arnold is in an invidious position, and has tried  to create a very different type of museum on the proverbial shoestring. (New York Times)

 "After an old-fashioned, all-round team  performance ... it might seem invidious to single out one  player," admits the paper before singling out one player. (Guardian)


      The cheap shots against the Democrats and Obama at  the beginning were unnecessary and invidious.  (Washington Post)


  Joining the cheerleading squad so you can poison the football team is insidious. Yelling, "Teams like yours  always lose!" at the game is invidious.

If something is slowly and secretly causing harm, it's insidious — like the rumors no one seems to listen to until suddenly someone's reputation is ruined. Continue reading...

Something can be described as invidious when it is resentful, discriminatory or envious, as in: "Fred was angered by the invidious gossip about his divorce being spread by his ex-wife's allies." Continue reading...



instant/
instance

Around the Vocabulary.com office, we might like an instance of tea, but we vehemently oppose instant tea.

That's because instance means an example or an occurrence:

Police investigated five instances of criminal mischief to motor vehicles on Forest Avenue

A student in the engineering academy, for instance, would have to take three engineering-specific electives.

There was an instance in a game in August where the catwalk came into play.

Instant, on the other hand, mean immediately or urgently:

Easy Reader: Philip Roth's Nemesis an Instant Classic

Starbucks announced last summer it would start retailing flavored instant coffee, and here it is.

Now think about the times when you fell victim to the instant desire to buy that new shinny thing.

Oddly enough, the two are related. Instance dates back to 1380 as meaning the current time, but it comes from the Medieval Latin (through Old French) instantia, which refers to both presence and urgency. Instant dates to about the same time, prior to 1398, as meaning a specific moment. It comes from the Medieval Latin instantem, meaning present and urgent. Instant picked up its modern meaning of immediately around 1443 from its English definition and instance seems to have never meant urgency, creating a distinction between the two.

But instant tea is still disgusting.

An instance is a specific example or case of something. One instance of being chased by a growling dog can make a person spend his whole life being afraid of animals. Continue reading...

An instant is a very short time. In combinations like instant coffee and instant replay it means available right away without a wait. Continue reading...



intense/
intensive/
intent


  If  your teacher offered you a choice between an intense course or an intensive  one, which one would you choose? And would you wonder what his intent was?


Intense means of severe  strength or force; having strong feelings. An intense course, then, would be an extremely tough course, such as  advanced nuclear science. Intensive means focused on one subject or area for a short time; extremely thorough. So  an intensive course would be very  focused on one topic and would last short time, as with summer courses. The  teacher's intent, his purpose or intention, might be to guide you to the best  course for you. Or it might be to fill his summer course.


  Searching  online, you'll find that in particular intensive is used instead of intense:


      Michigan Solar Panel Factory's Labor-Intensive Assembly  Tasks


      These hiking-intensive trips can, of course, be strenuous.


      Implementation can be a time-intensive process in terms of training,  data input, data conversion, and down time.


  Some dictionaries point out that intense is usually connected with a subjective  response, while intensive is  generally connected to an objective description. Here are a few examples that  get it right:


      Intense  heat sears Southern California for 4th day 


      ‎Seaton's intent to  lie, cheat is as serious as a felony‎ 


      Professional mountain bike rider in intensive care after  hit-and-run 

Intense means strong or extreme. If you accidentally spill a cup of hot coffee on yourself, you’ll probably feel intense heat, intense pain, and — if anyone happened to be watching — intense embarrassment. Continue reading...

Intensive describes things that are extreme, highly dramatic, or just plain thorough. An intensive chemistry course meets six days a week for five hours a day. If you're in intensive care, you're getting close medical scrutiny, 24/7. Continue reading...

If you are intent on doing something, you are determined to get it done. If you have an intent, you have a motive or purpose. Continue reading...



introvert/
extrovert

These two personality types are opposites — introverts focus inward, into their own thoughts, and extroverts focus outward, into the world. But don't get too excited; most people are a little bit of both.

Introverts are mostly concerned with what's going on inside their own heads, so an introvert is a quiet person who likes people but doesn't feel the need to go to parties every night. In fact, nightly parties would be decidedly un-fun for an introvert. Introverts are often but not always shy. Don't be shy about reading these examples:

"He could be an introvert but was also funny, sharp, observant, and spoke with piercing accuracy." (The Guardian)

"The first original song she released was 'Here' — an ‘introvert's anthem' about feeling alienated at a house party." (BBC)

Let's have a party for the extroverts! They'll all be there. Extroverts pay more attention to what's going on around them than what is in their heads. They love to get out and about. If the phone rings, an extrovert can't wait to answer it. Ring ring! Here are some examples:

"They tend to be extroverts and love getting attention from others." (Salon)

"The archetypal extrovert prefers action to contemplation, risk- taking to heed-taking, certainty to doubt." (Forbes)

Though different, introverts and extroverts hang out all the time, even in these bits from the news:

"Extroverts who promote themselves and introverts who keep their heads down are paid the same for jobs of the same value to the company." (New York Times)

"Introverts prefer much less stimulating environments than extroverts." (US News)

So, if we pretend we're batteries, introverts recharge alone, but extroverts get energy from other people. If you get them mixed up, remember that introverts turn inward and extroverts like external action.

An extrovert is a friendly person who enjoys talking to and being with other people. Extroverts love parties, talking on the phone, and meeting new people. Continue reading...

An introvert generally prefers solitary activities to interacting with large groups of people. If you would rather work through your feelings in your diary than have a conversation, then you are an introvert. Continue reading...



irony/
satire/
sarcasm

Irony, satire, and sarcasm all fall into the category of, "That's funny but I'm not sure what my English teacher wants me to call it."

Irony describes situations that are strange or funny because things happen in a way that seems to be the opposite of what you expected. Note the "opposite" here. If an expectation is black, then an ironic outcome would be white, not off-white or gray. Here are some clear examples.

Bill Hillmann, the author of multiple books about how to not get gored by bulls was the only non-Spaniard to get gored in the 2014 running of the bulls in Pamplona. (Cracked Magazine July 2015) 

The Business Software Alliance is an an anti-piracy agency that used to pay people to report unlicensed content on the internet. The group has been caught using a "stolen" photo in one of their ads to attract new snitches on Facebook. (Cracked Magazine July 2015) 

Satire means making fun of people by imitating them in ways that expose their stupidity or flaws.

In 2000, Saturday Night Live's satire of what happened in the [presidential] campaign became the conventional wisdom for what was going on in the campaign. (The Observer) 

The late-night talk and news satire is scheduled to return with new episodes in February. (Los Angeles Times)

As with satire, sarcasm depends on the listener or reader to be in on the joke. Sarcasm is insincere speech. Your mom asks if you're excited to start cleaning the kitchen and you say, "Yeah, right," when you mean "Heck no." Take this exchange from The Hunger Games.

"What about you? I've seen you in the market. You can lift hundred pound bags of flour," I snap at him.
"Yes and I'm sure the arena will be full of bags of flour for me to chuck at people."

To distinguish irony from satire and sarcasm, remember that irony pertains to situations while satire and sarcasm are forms of expression. People make satire and sarcasm happen. Irony is just there.

Reserve irony for situations where there's a gap between reality and expectations, especially when such a gap is created for dramatic or humorous effect. Continue reading...

Irony employed in the service of mocking or attacking someone is sarcasm. Saying "Oh, you're soooo clever!" with sarcasm means the target is really just a dunderhead. Continue reading...

Satire is a way of making fun of people by using silly or exaggerated language. Politicians are easy targets for satire, especially when they're acting self-righteous or hypocritical. Continue reading...



it's/
its

It's a bird! It's a plane! It's is short for "it is"! But its simply owns something — it's soooo possessive. Its is the possessive form of "it."

It's (with an apostrophe) is always short for "it is" (it's so fun) or "it has" (it's been nice knowing you). But, you might ask, don't apostrophes show possession, as in "teacher's pet"? Well, yes they do, but not necessarily with pronouns. Often an apostrophe is used to show a contraction, like in it's or who's. Here are some examples of it's:

"I'm astounded by people who want to 'know' the universe when it's hard enough to find your way around Chinatown," (Woody Allen)

"It's Raining Men" (The Weather Girls)

Without the apostrophe, the possessive pronoun its is less popular. It's not often an "it" owns something; it's usually "his" or "hers." But if a table is lopsided, one of its legs might need to get fixed. Don't call a person an "it" unless you want to get into a fight, so save the possessive its for things and give "his" or "her" to people. An animal has a gender, too, but it doesn't seem to mind, as long as its food dish is full. Here are more possessive its:

"Chopper 2 was over the scene at 44th Street between 5th and 6th Avenues where a black vehicle was seen tipped on its side." (CBS News online)

"Constant company wears out its welcome." (Irish Proverb)

In a nutshell: It's is always a contraction, so if you can replace it's with "it is" or "it has," then keep that apostrophe on there. It's appropriate! If you try to replace its with "it is" or "it has" and it doesn't make sense, don't use it. Its meaning will shine without that pesky apostrophe.



laudable/
laudatory


  Choose  your words:


    Acclaimed playwright-actor returns home for a laudable/laudatory  cause 


    When it was published, the most laudable/laudatory review  came from the novelist Anthony Burgess.


  In  the first sentence a playwright-actor comes home for a good cause, a  praiseworthy cause. That's laudable. Though a positive word, laudable many  times precedes a negative follow-up statement.


    I soon realized that the efforts, though laudable, have a  ways to go to meet the standard being set in my hometown.


    Cutting taxes laudable, but some city needs must be  addressed 


  In  the second sentence, Burgess gave a positive review of the it mentioned. The review itself isn't being described as  praiseworthy, the review was doing the praising. We want laudatory here. 


    A trio of laudatory articles on Amazon in recent days  compelled one to take another look at the company's performance.


    Thomas Keneally wrote a laudatory biography of Hasler in  1993 titled Utility Player.


  The  difference to watch for between these adjectives is who or what is receiving  the praise. If the noun that the adjective modifies is receiving the praise,  such as a worthy cause, then choose laudable. Think able to be praised. If the noun  is giving the praise to something else, such as a positive review of a book,  then choose laudatory. 

Use the word laudable to describe something that deserves praise or admiration, like your laudable efforts to start a recycling program at your school. Continue reading...

Laudatory has to do with praise. If you do great things, then you've done praise-worthy acts and people will use laudatory words when talking about you. Continue reading...



lay/
lie

The verbs lay and lie are total jerks. People often say lay when they mean lie, but it's wrong to lay around. You have to lay something, anything — lay an egg if you want. But you can lie around until the cows come home!

Lay  is a transitive verb, meaning it needs to transport something (i.e. a direct object). When you lay the blanket down, "blanket" is the direct object. Chickens and bees often have eggs as direct objects. Here are two examples of lay in the present tense:

"The queen bee only has to mate once and will lay eggs for life." (Washington Times)

"Men, after all, relied mainly on pop culture for inspiration before; now, there lay an entire world of opportunity." (Time)

Lay is also the past tense of lie (to recline). That's not confusing at all! Today you lie on the bed. Yesterday, you lay on the itchy couch. Here's another lay in the past tense:

"For years the letter lay in a box in the attic." (New York Times)

Please lie down if that helps you understand. You lie down when you're tired, or you might tell a lie and say you're wide awake right before you lie down and fall asleep. The noun lie doesn't cause trouble, so here are examples of the other lie used correctly:

"During the day I come up here and lie in the shade." (BBC)

"A liquid ocean and a rocky core may lie beneath the icy shell." (New York Times)

The main thing to remember about lay and lie is that lay needs a direct object and lie doesn't. You have to lay something somewhere. After that, feel free to lie down. Lay is for chickens, and lie is for sleepy people.

To lay is to set something down or put it in a horizontal position. It can also mean to position or prepare something for action — or simply to lay eggs. Continue reading...

When you don't tell the truth, you lie. You also lie down when you're sleepy and wonder what lies ahead of you. Continue reading...



loath/
loathe

Confusion between loath ("unwilling or reluctant") and loathe ("to hate") is a growing trend.


  What  do the following sentences have in common?


    But Saudi Arabia  isn't the only Muslim country that seems to loath Iran.


    Broadcasters are loathe to relinquish control of lucrative cable  package services to third party providers.


    I'm  loathe to put up another Netbook, so let's try this.



    Deep Down inside Bud Grant loaths the state of affairs in Minny.


  All  of them use either loath or loathe incorrectly and all are from  trusted publications. The error is a growing trend. Garner's Modern American Usage puts this error at stage 3:  "commonplace even among many well-educated people but is still avoided in  careful usage."


Loath means to be  unwilling or reluctant about something: 


      For-profit education institutions have been loath to put out  that kind of information.



      Coalition upper house leader David Davis was loath to speculate  on the final outcome in the 40-seat Legislative Council.

Loathe, on the other  hand, means to strongly dislike someone or something or find it disgusting:



      Love it or loathe it, there's no denying that the holiday season  is upon us.


      And if voters in general dislike Obamacare, Republican voters  positively loathe it.



  When  it comes to loath and loathe, choose your words with care and  avoid a common error.

If you are loath to do something, you really don't want to do it. If you are reluctant to go swimming, people will say you are loath to swim — but if they are really mean, they might throw you in the pool anyway. Continue reading...

If you loathe someone or something, you hate them very much. You might not choose to eat raw carrots if you dislike them, but if you loathe them, you might have a hard time even having them on your plate. Continue reading...



lose/
loose

Lose sounds like snooze. If you lose something, you don’t have it anymore. Add an "o," and loose rhymes with goose and describes something that’s not attached.

The word lose has been through some changes since it hit the scene in the year 900. Now you can lose a game, lose your mind, lose control, lose your temper, lose your… train of thought, but you can also lose your car keys or ten pounds. Here are some current examples (because Old English would be confusing):

"If you know you eat all the time because you need something, but you aren’t sure what you need, diets won’t help you lose weight.” (US News)

"Sometimes I have trouble staying focused and I lose my train of thought,” Ford said. (Washington Times)

Loose is also an old word. Its meaning overlapped with lose's at some point, but now they’re separate. Loose got loose! It means not attached well, like a loose tooth, or free like a loose dog that’s off the leash. Lips come in pairs, like the "o’s" in loose, and loose lips sink ships. Here are more examples:

“State police say they're not sure how many chickens are on the loose." (US News)

"And sheepskin coats flowed loose and luxuriously around the body." (Washington Post.)

If you get them mixed up, don’t feel bad: lose and loose do have a shared history. To remember the difference, think of how a goose can get loose. But when loose loses an “o,” it’s gone forever. If you snooze, you lose.

If something is loose, it's not attached very securely to anything. Be sure the horse trailer attached to your truck isn't loose, or it might just roll away on its own while you're on the highway. Continue reading...

The verb to lose means something has gone missing. Maybe it's your car keys. Maybe it's points in a game. Maybe it's the love of your life. Sorry about that. Continue reading...



luxuriant/
luxurious


  No  doubt advertising affects language. Where would we be without the free gift, new and improved, or supersize? (Perhaps writing more grammatically  and eating more healthily...) In yet another attempt to reduce English to  features and selling points, advertisers often use luxuriant to describe their products or services:


      Luxuriant Cracked Heel Repair


      Luxuriant Christmas Tree Wallpaper


      Miralux Luxuriant Mattress


  Problem  is luxuriant means lush growth; thick  and rich. As in a luxuriant growth of leaves in the spring. What those  advertisers really want is luxurious,  as in self-indulgent; comfort, elegance, or enjoyment in the extreme:


      Mediterranea ... is a luxurious community situated adjacent to  the sea, boasting stunning views of the Mediterranean.


      This luxurious penthouse at the One Hyde Park development in  the Knightsbridge of London just sold for a record-breaking £140 million or  $220 million.


      French President Nicolas Sarkozy orders brand new, luxurious  presidential jet to rival Air Force One


  As  a society, we tolerate a lot of bent or outright broken language rules in  advertising. We tune a lot of it out, anyway. But the careful writer should not  emulate advertising-speak and should be wary of copying its word usage. Using luxuriant for luxurious is very much considered an error and is to be avoided.

You can use the adjective luxuriant to describe something really luxurious or full and lush. If you walk through a dense forest after it rains, it's really luxuriant with green plants overgrowing the paths. Continue reading...

The adjective luxurious describes something that is of very high quality or expensive taste, like your luxurious living room filled with the softest rugs and gorgeous furniture hand-crafted in Italy. Continue reading...



mantle/
mantel

A mantle is a covering, like a robe. But a mantel is a ledge over a fireplace. If Little Red Riding Hood tosses her cloak on the shelf above her fireplace, she has a mantle on the mantel.

Mantle is a word that covers lots of meanings. The word can refer to a covering, like ivy on a building, or to the layer of the Earth’s interior between the core and the crust. A mantle, in the sense of a type of cloak, was worn by royalty to show authority. Mantle can also refer figuratively to power or authority. In this sense, someone could take the mantle of the student council or pass the mantle to another person. Less frequently, mantle is used as a verb meaning "to cover," as in "snow mantled the trees."

Here are some examples that show mantle’s range of meanings:

A mantel, on the other hand, goes over the fireplace. Although mantle has been an alternate spelling for mantel in American English, let your fireplace ledge have its glory and spell it with an el. Unlike mantle, which has many meanings, the word mantel refers only to that shelf above the fire.

Here are some mantels in the wild:

Remember, while the word mantle covers many ideas, a mantel is an elegant shelf that goes over the fireplace.

A mantel is a shelf that sticks out just above a fireplace. People often put trophies and pictures on their mantel. Continue reading...

A mantle is a word for something that blankets over something else, like the loose cloak worn by Little Red Riding Hood or the layer of earth between the crust and core. Continue reading...



marital/
martial


Marital and martial look almost  alike, but the only time they overlap  is when you declare war on your spouse. Marital has to do with marriage, and martial is  concerned with fighting.

Marital comes from the word marriage. It means either related to marriage or to a husband and his role in a marriage  (usually the first). It comes from the Latin marītalis, used to describe  something belonging to married people. Although it's not very romantic, being  married is a legal status, so the word marital shows up in court all the time:


    New Hampshire's House plans to investigate whether  grounds exist to impeach a marital master, a court officer that handles family court cases. (Boston Globe)


    Overall, the pre-marital contract can prevent a bad divorce experience. (FiGuide.com)


  On  the other fist, martial is related to war; related to the profession of war;  or the characteristics of a warrior. These meanings come from the Latin martialis,  which is from Mars, the Roman god of war. Martial law is when the military takes over, and a martial art is something like karate or  judo, as in these examples from the news: 


    Last week Bahrain called in troops from its fellow  Sunni-ruled neighbours, declared martial law and launched a crackdown that drove the protesters from the streets. (Reuters)


    An off-duty Houston police officer used a martial arts move to kill a man who had  asked a bartender for her telephone number. (Houston Chronicle)


  With marital, remember the connection to marriage in sound and  spelling: mari- and marri-. When looking at martial, think  of Martians from Mars, the Roman god of war. People in divorce court like to  move the "i" to the other side of the "t."

Use the adjective marital to describe something that relates to a marriage. You may envy the marital contentment of spouses who communicate well with each other. Continue reading...

An adjective referring to the military, the word martial adds a warlike tone to any noun it describes. Continue reading...



mean/
median/
average


      Wordsmiths  sometimes dislike numbers, or at least have a hard time grasping them. These words offer us an  opportunity to better understand numbers and use their terms more precisely in  writing and speaking.


      Let's  say we have a set of numbers:


      The mean, sometimes called the arithmetic mean, of this set is 33. The  mean is the sum of all the numbers in the set (167) divided by the amount of  numbers in the set (5).


      The median is the middle point of a  number set, in which half the numbers are above the median and half are below.  In our set above, the median is 30. But what if your number set has an even  number of, er, numbers:


      To  calculate the median here, add the two middle numbers (30 + 47) and divide by  2. The median for our new list is 38.5. 


      So  far, so good. But what about average?  The average of a set of numbers is the same as its mean; they're synonyms.


      Let's  see our terms in action:


          Performance is calculated by the arithmetic mean of the returns in an  equally weighted portfolio of individual stocks, on a quarterly basis.


          The median single-family homeowner in town will pay $175 more  in property taxes this year.


          Average retail gas prices in California fell 1.3 cents in the  last week, putting the average tank of gas at $3.13 per gallon.


      While  we wordy types may still struggle to understand what an "equally weighted  portfolio" is, wonder whether we are median single-family homeowners, or  continue to look for lower-than-average gas prices, at least we know how the mean, median, and average were  calculated.

If something is average, it's ordinary and not very special. You might say a movie was average if you thought it was just okay. Continue reading...

If you got a fortune cookie with the message "Your future will contain many bananas," you might ask, "What on earth does that mean?" In other words, you wonder what the intention or meaning of the fortune might be. Continue reading...

Median means middle. When a strip of grass divides one direction of a highway from another, it's called a median because it runs through the middle. Continue reading...



medal/
meddle/
mettle

Here we have a trio of words that sound similar (at least in American English) but mean very different things: medal, meddle, and mettle.

A medal is a disc made of metal with an inscription or image. It is generally used as an award or a commemoration of an event:

‎Maplewood Officers Receive Medal Of Valor

Special Olympics duo wins gold medal in golf‎

To meddle is to interfere with someone or something:

Belarus will not let any other country meddle in its December presidential election.

Politicians meddle with existing taxation arrangements at their peril.

Finally, mettle is a quality or qualities that help a person in a difficult situation. Those qualities might include courage, ardor, and stamina:

Madison native tests his mettle in "Hell's Kitchen"

Test of mettle: How the Steelers can win without Roethlisberger

‎If you don't speak American English, you might be wondering why mettle makes this list. In American English, when a t appears in an unstressed syllable between two vowels—or between a vowel and an l, as is the case here—that t is said with a flap of the tongue similar to how we say d. Linguists call it a "medial flap." The same thing happens in betting, metal, noted, writing and many other words.

A medal is an award for some contest or achievement. You might win a medal for coming in third place at the cupcake baking championship. Continue reading...

To meddle is to interfere. You can meddle in someone else's affairs, and you can meddle with someone else's things. Either way, you’re messing with someone else’s stuff and she probably doesn’t like it. Continue reading...

Mettle is the courage to carry on. If someone wants to "test your mettle," they want to see if you have the heart to follow through when the going gets tough. Continue reading...



metaphor/
simile

Both make comparisons, but a metaphor compares one thing to another straight up, while a simile uses "like" or "as."

The word metaphor comes from the Greek metaphora "to transfer." With a metaphor, an idea is transferred from one word to another. It's implicit, like in this metaphor from Flannery O'Connor, "He had measured five feet four inches of pure gamecock." But don't mix them — mixed metaphors get confusing. Don't put all of your eggs in one doghouse. Wha? Here are some examples of the word itself:

Driving is such a metaphor, literally and figuratively, for freedom — as it is in the movie — so I'm amazed when some people never learn it. (Los Angeles Times)

Never mind what Lemmy said — with respect, 'Ace of Spades' can be viewed as a metaphor. (BBC)

Then it was all about finding the right analogy or metaphor for the way to tell an audience. (New York Times)

A simile is similar but it always uses "like" or "as." In fact, the word simile comes from the Latin for "a like thing." A simile's comparison is explicit. Just like that old joke from Fat Albert, "You're like school on Saturday: no class!" But seriously folks, here are some examples of the word in action:

Clouds roasted like marshmallows; everything — eventually — scorched beyond simile. (The New Yorker)

It's like McDonald's,' she said, pleased to have landed on a simile that an American reporter would surely appreciate. ( New York Times)

A metaphor is direct — Rudolpho is a cow! But a simile can soften the blow — Rudolpho is like a cow. Use them in descriptive writing or any time you're feeling sassy.

If you brag that "the world's your oyster," you're using a metaphor from Shakespeare, who knew a thing or two about figures of speech. Continue reading...

Use the noun simile when describing a comparison between two fundamentally different things, such as: "His voice was smooth, like butter in a warm pan." Continue reading...



moral/
morale


      Choose  your words:


Moral/Morale of the story: If you became a middle school football  coach so you could trick little kids, shame on you.


        Posh needed a moral-/morale-boosting win after a couple of insipid  home displays and credit to the players for providing it.


      In  our first sentence, we want a word that means the lesson of the story,  especially a lesson of right and wrong. That word is moral. In the plural, it refers to the rules by which one conducts  one's life. Some more examples that use moral:


        However, here are 10 moral character failings destroying our  nation that I feel, like the mayor, we ought to be up in arms about addressing.


        Saudi Arabia Blocks Facebook on Moral Grounds, Promptly Unblocks  It


      The  second sentence describes a win that will make the team feel more confident and  enthusiastic. Here the choice is morale. If your department or team has a strong sense of common purpose or dedication,  your morale is high; if there's a lot  of bickering going on and people are quitting the company or just not doing  their jobs, morale is low.Some more  examples:


      Perks  keep morale high at Michigan's top workplaces


        To improve officer  morale, Sheppard said he will repair union relations, address concerns that officer  discipline is handled unfairly and solicit more officer input while improving training..

The moral of a story is the lesson that story teaches about how to behave in the world. Continue reading...

Morale is the spirit a group has that makes them want to succeed. It's a sense of well-being that comes from confidence, usefulness, and purpose. Continue reading...



morbid/
moribund

Morbid describes  something gruesome, like smallpox or Frankenstein's monster. Moribund refers to the act of dying.  Goths love both. What fun!

Morbid and moribund are both dark and  popular around Halloween, but if you dig up their graves, you'll find their  Latin bones are different: Morbid comes from morbus, for disease,  while moribund comes from morī, for dying.

Morbid is a busy adjective, going from dark to  darker describing terrible things such as anything related to disease -obesity,  insanity, the plague - or unwholesome thoughts. Morbid pops up all over the place, such as in 

 The Morbid Imagination, a  Website about Gothic Horror and the Arts.

Or in this quote from a book about country life:

 And the  slender, undersized, morbid girl needed just such  tonic. (Lillian Elizabeth Roy)

You can  be morbidly obese or morbidly thin, as long as you're sick in some way, even in  the head, you're morbid. Appropriately, Morbid is the name of  a Swedish death metal band.

On the other hand, moribund means dying, literally or figuratively.  It can refer to a person about to leave this world behind or to something  that's almost obsolete. In both senses, moribund does not mean death but  dying. It refers to the action, not the outcome, like in this example from an  old medical book:

 This heart was taken from a man who came into the hospital  in a moribund condition.

The word  also shows up in the news, all too often describing an economy:

 But the  domestic economy remains moribund, while the fragile export  recovery could be sabotaged by slowing in the global economy. (New York Times)

The hermit crab  that hasn't had water in three days is a moribund pet. The kid with the black lipstick who wants it to die is morbid. 	

If the first section of the newspaper you read is the obituaries, you could be considered morbid. Morbid is a word used to describe anyone who spends too much time thinking about death or disease. Continue reading...

Something that is moribund is almost dead, like a moribund economy that has been stuck in a recession for years. Continue reading...



nauseated/
nauseous


  If you're nauseated you're about to throw up, if you're nauseous,  you're a toxic funk and you're going to make someone else puke. These words are  used interchangeably so often that it makes word nerds feel nauseated! 

Nauseated is how you feel after eating funnel cake and riding the tilt-a-whirl,  when you're two months pregnant, or any other time you need a vomit bag. Here  are some examples from the New York  Times,


    He  was constantly nauseated, so much so that he lost 50 pounds.

In  the place of public transport, fleets of private vans career from stop to stop  with their hapless, nauseated passengers.

Nauseous, on  the other hand, should  be reserved to mean causing that feeling, not having it. But it's used so often  now to mean "feeling sick," that dictionaries define it that way. Here's how to  use the word if you want to tuck in your shirt and be proper:

It  does not contain iodine, but is said to possess all the therapeutic qualities  of cod-liver oil without its nauseous taste. (Encyclopedia Britannica)

But  more examples look like this:

She  was too nauseous to keep down her food. (BBC)

In  his Modern American Usage, Garner labels this usage as  "ubiquitous" but held on to by "die-hard snoots." The Oxford English Dictionary calls this  usage of nauseous common. Another distinction is that nauseated can be used to describe "sick in the  stomach" and nauseous for "sickening to think about."


  Sticklers  will keep the distinction. If you feel nauseated after thinking about this nauseous distinction, then you're on the right track.

When you're nauseated, you're queasy, or you feel like you might vomit. If you have the flu, you'll probably spend a day or two feeling nauseated. Continue reading...

If you’re nauseous, you feel queasy and sick to your stomach, and you might feel like vomiting. Could be the stomach flu or too much food before that roller-coaster ride. Continue reading...



naval/
navel

Can  you name this type of orange?


If  you said a navel orange, give  yourself a gold star (or a navel orange, if you're feeling peckish). Navel refers to the spot in the middle  of your belly where the umbilical cord was once attached. The oranges are refer  to as thus because they have a dimple that resembles, well, a navel. Some more  examples of navel:


      How to prevent navel  piercing deformity when pregnant?


      Navel  orange production blossoms this season 


Navel gazing refers to being  obsessed with oneself or solely focused on one issue, generally a minor one:


      Americans are incredibly  self-absorbed navel gazers. 


      Now it seems many  thirtysomethings find themselves succumbing to existential navel-gazing. 'What did  I do with my life?' these relative whippersnappers ask.


Naval on the other hand, pertains to a navy, that branch of the  military that operates at sea.


      The Puget Sound Naval  Shipyard and Intermediate Maintenance Facility has agreed to pay $56,000 for hazardous  waste violations.

 IDF naval forces recently boarded the yacht "Irene."


      The amount owners had to spend on repairs and naval stores fell  for all vessel types, with container ships again having the largest decline.


      Remember,  your navel is in the center of your belly, while naval ships belong out at sea.

Naval means "about a navy or navies." If you are interested in naval history, you probably enjoy seeing ships used in sea battles. Continue reading...

If you look down at your stomach, you can see your navel. It’s that weird-looking round depression in the middle of your belly, unless you have an "outie," in which case it pokes out instead of in. Continue reading...



objective/
subjective

Anything objective sticks to the facts, but anything subjective has feelings. Objective and subjective are opposites. Objective: It is raining. Subjective: I love the rain!

Objective  is a busy word and that's a fact. An objective is a goal, but to be objective is to be unbiased. If you're objective about something, you have no personal feelings about it. In grammar land, objective relates to the object of a sentence. Anyway, people often try to be objective, but it's easier for robots. Here are examples:

"DNA testing and fingerprint analysis and all that technology stuff is objective, they declare confidently. The machine cannot be fooled." (Salon)

"Consider checking in with a third party, to get an objective opinion." (Wall Street Journal)

Subjective , on the other hand, has feelings. Anything subjective is subject to interpretation. In grammar land, this word relates to the subject of the sentence. Usually, subjective means influenced by emotions or opinions. Humans are a subjective bunch and we like it that way! Here's subjective in the wild:

"Because many of the decisions we made are subjective, there is the possibility of human error in our data set." (Slate)

"Now, I realize that is totally subjective because there is no standard unit of measurement for fun." (New York Times)

It's true that opposites attract. Here are some examples of both words cozying up in the same sentence:

"But now we, as a pathologists, need more objective measures because symptoms, to a certain degree, are subjective." ( Time)

"We take our unruly, subjective feelings about a year of television and groom them into something that looks mathematical and objective." (Slate)

Be objective when writing things like summaries or news articles, but feel free to be subjective for arguments and opinions.

An objective is something you plan to achieve. A military objective is the overall plan for a mission. The objective for a bake sale is to raise money. If your objective is to learn a new word, you have succeeded. Continue reading...

Things that are subjective are open to interpretation. If you go see a movie about a jewel thief, the topic is not subjective. But whether it's a good movie or not is subjective. Continue reading...



optimistic/
pessimistic

An optimistic person expects all the best things to happen! Is it raining money yet? A pessimistic person is a downer. Who cares if it's raining money? They'll never get any.

Optimistic  people see the best in the world. Optimistic ideas have been around for a while — Voltaire's "Candide" (1759) mocked them thoroughly. Here's an optimistic quote from Ralph Waldo Emerson: "Write it on your heart that every day is the best day in the year." Here are some more recent examples from the news:

"It's been so positive…He's always optimistic, always hungry for the next one." (Washington Times)

"It's an optimistic assessment that clashes hard with the reality on the ground." (Los Angeles Times)

Abandon all hope ye who enter here! A pessimistic person expects the worst in every situation. Doom and gloom rule a pessimistic attitude. In business, a pessimistic mood prevents people from investing. If you're pessimistic, you see a beautiful waterfall and assume you're going to die in it. Here are some examples of the word:

"Designed to cope with the most pessimistic nightmare of an apocalypse, a day spent here is not destined to be uplifting." ( BBC)

"There has also been a smaller—yet still statistically significant—rise in the frequency of negative words, such as 'disappointing' and 'pessimistic'." (Nature)

These words often show up together:

"And my personal philosophy is I'd rather be optimistic and wrong rather than pessimistic and right." (Time)

"A higher life expectancy estimate is optimistic for the human condition, but pessimistic for the Social Security Trust Fund." (New York Times)

Most people are a little of both, and you can certainly be optimistic — you just learned new words! Or pessimistic — you'll probably just forget them, though. Sigh.

An optimistic person thinks the best possible thing will happen, and hopes for it even if it's not likely. Someone who's a tad too confident this way is also sometimes called optimistic. Continue reading...

Pessimistic describes the state of mind of someone who always expects the worst. A pessimistic attitude isn't very hopeful, shows little optimism, and can be a downer for everyone else. Continue reading...



overdue/
overdo

If you’re overdue for a trip to the gym, be careful not to overdo it on the exercise when you get there — otherwise you’ll be sore. Anything overdue should’ve happened already, but to overdo something is to do too much of it.

A library book or a cable bill is overdue when it’s late. Anything that is long overdue has taken too long to happen, like justice or positive change. Haven’t sent thank-you notes from last year’s birthday party? They’re definitely overdue! Luckily, these examples aren’t overdue:

Once a patron has used up their three renewal periods, they will have 45 days to return an overdue book. (Los Angeles Times)

The French don’t deprive themselves of delicious desserts — but they also don’t overdo it. (Washington Post)

Overdue is an adjective, like that overdue library book you keep forgetting to return. Overdo is a verb. Don’t overdo it by causing a scene if someone gets these two words mixed up!

 Continue reading...

Something that's overdue should have happened or been dealt with a long time ago, like the long overdue recognition for the people who rescued motorists in last winter's big snowstorm. Continue reading...



palate/
palette/
pallet


      Time for a pop quiz! Choose your words...


        When they get back, they should  try to incorporate some of that raw beauty into the Rockies' color palate/palette/pallet.


        The students gather palates/palettes/pallets  during the week and stockpile them for sledding.


        Reports are that the company  will search out favorite regional foods to pepper the palate/palette/pallet for  fans in Baltimore.


      The first sentence refers to the range of colors the  Rocky Mountains offer. The correct choice is palette. It can also refer to the board an artist uses to mix paints  or the range of tone in music:


        A dark chocolate in the shape  of an artist's palette, with a relief of paint brushes and paints, is filled with  a liquor-flavored butter cream. 


        Engineer and producer Butler  brings a rich palette of sounds and styles, often trading in unabashed synth-based tracks.


      The second sentence refers to a platform used for  moving things: a pallet. The term can  also mean a straw mattress or a small bed:


        Paper-based honeycomb pallets  extend branding surface on displays


        They would be cutting demos  and doing sessions until one in the morning, so I'd make a little pallet on the  couch and crash and stay there all week.


      Our final sentence describes Baltimoreans' preference  of flavors in food, their palate. Palate can also mean the roof of one's mouth  or the taste of something, such as wine:


        They had assumed the receptors  would be restricted to the tongue, soft palate, upper oesophagus and epiglottis.


        The palate has plum, smoke,  a surprising taste of apricot, but it is all wrapped in burnt rubber.

Touch your tongue to the top of your mouth. What you're touching is your palate. Palate is often used when discussing taste in a broader sense, as in: chocolate cake is pleasing to the palate. Continue reading...

A palette is a range of colors. It is also the board that artists use to hold and mix paint. Picture Picasso in his blue period: He is holding a palette on which you see a limited palette of blue tones. Continue reading...

Pallet is a busy noun, but it’s mainly a slab or framework of wood used for carrying things. The most common type of pallet is the kind used to move cargo. Continue reading...



paradox/
oxymoron

A paradox is a logical puzzle that seems to contradict itself. No it isn't. Actually, it is. An oxymoron is a figure of speech — words that seem to cancel each other out, like "working vacation" or "instant classic."

A paradox makes your brain hurt because it seems like something is true and false at the same time. M.C. Escher's "Relativity" is a visual paradox. The floor is the ceiling! Part of the fun of a paradox is figuring out if it really is one. How about this one: A father and son get in a car wreck and the father dies. The son goes to the hospital, but the doctor says, "I can't operate on him. He's my son." Confused? Ha! Not a paradox, though — the doctor is his mom. Here's a paradox by William Wordsworth, "The child is father of the man." Check out the word in action:

"He seemed to absorb the baffling paradoxes of quantum theory with ease." (Big Science)

"The answer, for Muji, is a neat paradox, like a Zen koan: massive minimalism through perpetual growth." (New Yorker)

Oh jumbo shrimp of the world, we're not calling you morons. You're oxymorons! The word itself is an oxymoron, a contradiction. It comes from the Greek oxys for "sharp" and moros for "stupid." Sharply stupid. Oxymorons gone mild wild:

"This article proves that good economic news is an oxymoron." (New York Times)

"The ultimate oxymoron: I was once invited to an agoraphobic convention," he said. (Washington Post)

Both are contradictions, but a paradox is something to think on, and an oxymoron is a description, enjoyed in the moment then gone.

Jumbo shrimp? Open secret? Use oxymoron to refer to a word or phrase that contradicts itself, usually to create some rhetorical effect. Continue reading...

Here's a mind-bender: "This statement is false." If you think it's true, then it must be false, but if you think it's false, it must be true. Now that's a paradox! Continue reading...



parameter/
perimeter


Parameter is a limit that affects how something can be done, and perimeter is the outline of a physical  area. Both words have special meanings in math, but they take off their pocket  protectors and relax their definitions when they join the rest of us. 

Parameter is the fancier math and science  word. In mathematics, parameter is a measurable factor in a system.  Outside of math, parameter is still a factor, property, or  characteristic. It can also be a boundary or a limit. Here are some examples:


    That makes it the heaviest observed elementary  particle yet discovered, but within the parameters set by the Standard  Model. (Scientific America)


    "As hard as  journalism is, at least you have parameters," she said. (New York Times)


    Within those parameters, Ms. Gray played with  color, creating an upbeat show reflecting London's mad, mad fashion world. (New York Times)


  In  mathematics, the perimeter is the boundary of a geometric figure. In  mainstream language, it can be the limit of any physical area, often one  protected by an armed force: secure the perimeter! Here are some examples from the news:


    Police set up a perimeter around the house and blocked off Avery Street for safety reasons, Sgt. Scott  Custer said. (Inquiring News)

 Newest study finds fuel spill's perimeter expanding. (KOB-TV)


  Some  linguistic snobs don't like parameter's meaning of a boundary or limit  when perimeter would do. But  according to Garner's Modern American Usage, the use of parameter to mean boundary is "virtually  universal" except by "die-hard snoots." Unless you are writing  for such an audience (a math professor, perhaps), you can use parameter to mean boundary.


  Just  remember: The parameters of playing  hide-and-seek are not peeking while you count, and to stay within the perimeter of the yard when you hide. 

A parameter is a limit. In mathematics a parameter is a constant in an equation, but parameter isn’t just for math anymore: now any system can have parameters that define its operation. You can set parameters for your class debate. Continue reading...

The noun perimeter refers to the border of an enclosed space. The perimeter of a house is its property line. For a country, it would be that country’s borders. Continue reading...



parody/
parity

They're different, but when these words are said out loud it's hard to tell them apart. A parody is a silly spoof and parity is equality, and that's no joke.

A parody turns making fun of something into an art form. Imitating the way someone talks or writes is a parody. Broken down into its Greek roots, it's para for "beside," and ode as in "song," which forms paroidia for a "burlesque song or poem." A parody isn't as risqué as a burlesque, but it's definitely supposed to be funny. Here are some examples of the word:

"He's also a professed fan of the 1960s spy parody ‘Get Smart.'" (Washington Times)

"The online parody shows a player pretending to be J.J." (Los Angeles Times)

"From a Saturday Night Live hosting gig to a parody Twitter account, the ‘Girls' star is everywhere." (Time)

When there's parity, things are even-steven. Parity means equality. It even has Latin roots in par, which means, of course, equal. If a scale is balanced, there is parity.

It's used in finance:

"She said she thinks the euro will fall below parity against the U.S. dollar in the coming year." (Wall Street Journal)

In social contexts:

"None of this started out as a fight over gender parity, but now that it looks like one, you can be sure women will notice."

And sports:

"In most seasons, parity usually expires some time around November as the league's usual suspects take control." (Wall Street Journal)

They word parody probably has more fun than parity, which just likes to even things out. But there is parity between these words; they are both awesome.

All things being equal, parity means, basically, equality. It’s used in finance, physics, math, and even sports. When people talk about parity in a football league, for example, they mean the teams are evenly matched. Go, evenly matched team, go! Continue reading...

A parody is a humorous or mocking imitation of something, using the same form as the original. To parody a poem, you have to write another poem. Continue reading...



peak/
peek/
pique

Let's look at three homophones: peak, peek, and pique. Peak is a topmost point, such as a mountain peak, or to reach that point:

We're sort of at peak demand right now.

A peek is a glance or a quick look, like you do with the unwrapped Christmas presents at the bottom of your loved one's closet. It can also mean to glance or to peer at. It's frequently paired with sneak, which can lead you to use the incorrect peak:

Residents take a peek at bike and pedestrian safety plans

Yellowstone Offers Sneak Peek Of New Visitor Center

Finally, pique is to upset or excite someone. You will sometimes see peek one's interest for pique one's interest, but don't be fooled. If you're piquing someone's interest, you are exciting their interest not taking a quick look at it:

If that doesn't pique your interest, you can leave (but I'm keeping your shoes).

Here's your mnemonic device:

Use the word peak to refer to the pointy top of something, such as the jagged peak of a tall mountain or the tapered peak that forms when you beat egg whites for a recipe. Continue reading...

When you peek, you take a quick glance at something. It's incredibly tempting when you're little to peek at your birthday presents, but you soon learn how disappointing it is to spoil the surprise. Continue reading...

The verb pique means to make someone angry or annoyed. But when something piques your interest or curiosity, here the verb pique just means to arouse, stimulate, or excite. Continue reading...



peddle/
pedal/
petal


  Sometimes  the only way to choose your words with homophones is to memorize their  spellings and meanings. Pedal/peddle/petal is one such set of homophones.


  A pedal is a lever controlled with the  foot, such as found on a piano or a bicycle. To pedal is to use such a lever to control something. It descends from  the Late Latin pedale, for a thing of  the foot, which descends ultimately from the Latin pēs, for foot.


      The city is expected to finalize this week a five-year  contract to bring pedal boats back to Wesley Lake this summer.


      Bicycle riders will be pedaling over hills and through  pastures Saturday near Stonewall.


  To peddle can mean to travel around  selling items (think door-to-door salesmen). It can also mean to sell illicit  drugs or, informally, to give out or spread, as with information or lies.


      A former Alaska lawmaker has pleaded guilty to a state count  of letting unregistered lobbyists peddle their ideas to him.


      The Health Sciences Authority (HSA) has warned the public  against taking black pills peddled in unlabelled bottles.


  Finally,  a petal is a flower's brightly colored leaf that joins with other petals to  form the flower's corolla.


      You will start with a great big rose complete with curly  petals and shiny leaves painted from reference.


      Spread generously or pipe over the cooled cupcakes and top  each with a rose petal.


  Remember  that pedal is related to foot through the Latin pēs and that someone who peddles  goods goes from door to door. If you don't want either of  those, then you can choose the flower's petal.

Anything you push with your feet to control a machine, vehicle, or instrument is a pedal. When you use a sewing machine, you push the pedal with your foot to make the needle move up and down. Continue reading...

When you peddle something, you go out and try to sell it. It's cute when a little kid peddles his homemade birthday cards around the neighborhood, but if an adult did that it might be annoying. Continue reading...

A petal is a part of a flower. Most flowers have a ring of brightly colored petals surrounding the center part of the blossom. Continue reading...



persecute/
prosecute


          But I firmly believe these particular bureaucrats have only one  group they plan to monitor and persecute — I mean prosecute — on this issue.


      What  is it about pursuing legal action that makes people think of harassing someone?  Although we're not sure, it turns out that people have been confusing persecute and prosecute from the start.


Prosecute entered English  first: probably before 1425 from prosecuten (to follow up or pursue) in Polychronicon by Ranulf Higdon. Higdongot his term  from the Latin prōsecūtus, whose root  means to pursue. By 1579, prosecute had taken on the sense of pursuing legal action before a court:


          His compassion and  experience would allow him to prosecute cases that will make us all safer.


Persecute, on the other  hand, entered English in 1450 meaning to pursue for the purpose of harming.  Before 1450, it had often been confused with prosecuten from (you guessed it) Higdon's Polychronicon. Persecute, however, comes from the Middle French persécuter, to pursue, torment, or begin legal action. Today, persecute can mean harming, harassing, tormenting, or oppressing:


          "It was actively  involved in every operation to persecute, expel and exterminate the Jews from the  very beginning," he said.


      Given  that persecute and prosecute once both meant shades of to  pursue and to begin legal action, perhaps those who confuse the two should be  neither prosecuted or persecuted.

To persecute is to make someone suffer or to keep them in bad circumstances. In some parts of the world governments or military groups persecute, or punish, people for religious beliefs, often sending them to prisons or work camps. Continue reading...

To prosecute is to participate in or pursue something to completion, like a government’s intention to prosecute a war. Prosecute is most often used for bringing legal action against an accused person or group. Continue reading...



personal/
personnel


  Choose  the right word for each sentence:


      XYZ Co. is letting go of personal/personnel at an alarming  rate.


      My personal/personnel files include notes on how to take  over the world using just a red paperclip.


      Match.com and other dating sites have eliminated the need to  advertise in the personals/personnels.


      The HR department kept James' personal/personnel file  updated with all the complaints about his work habits.


Personal and personnel can be confused if the writer  is not diligent, especially as both can be used as a noun and an adjective.  Let's go through the quiz to uncover all four usages.


  The  first example could say that XYZ Co. is laying off employees or staff; the  correct choice here is personnel, a  plural noun. You wouldn't have one personnel; you'd have many. 


  The  second sentence calls for personal. Personal refers to something of a  particular person's, something done in person, something related to a person,  and so on. My files belong to me; they are personal. They don't have anything to do with my employer.


  The  third sentence refers to those ads placed in a newspaper by people looking for  romance or wishing to send messages to others. Personals is the correct, if increasingly rare, choice.


  In  the final sentence, a personnel file  is an employee file. Although the file is about one person and is somewhat  private, it is limited to James' work life at his current company; it is a file  kept by the company about its employee.


  To  remember which word is which, try this: Personnel has two ns, just as a company has to  have at least two employees to have personnel. Anything personal (one n) is about one individual.

When something's personal, it's all about you. A personal decision is one you make on your own and it’s probably about something that concerns you, too. Your personal possessions are things that belong to you. Continue reading...

Personnel is a noun describing a group of people who follow orders, usually at a company. If you have a job, you’re probably considered personnel to be managed. Continue reading...



pitiable/
pitiful/
piteous/
pitiless

We don't often look at four words that can be easily confused for each other, but this pack is an exception. Let's start with our base word: pity. Pity is to feel sorrow or compassion for someone's misfortunes or sorrows. It can also be something that causes sorrow or disappointment:

Pity the misunderstood conifer: Evergreens' many benefits overlooked

Pitiless, then, is without (-less) pity, lacking compassion. Pitiless can be cruel or merciless:

Hell, on the other hand, will be like having to read an unauthorised biography of yourself written by a pitiless researcher who has exposed your secrets.

Pitiable, piteous, and pitiful all mean some shade of deserving pity. Let's see if we can untangle the differences. Piteous and pitiable both mean being deserving of pity:

A single drought could spell the end of a society and doom its inhabitants to piteous deaths.

Barb tried to comfort me as Rusty looked on, giving me a pitiable shake of the head.

Pitiable is found 10 times as often, however, as piteous in Google News search results. Because of this difference, piteous has become a more archaic, poetic word, while pitiable remains more common. The latter also means scornfully small or poor:

All of these foods proffer very pitiable nutritional value, and it consequently makes no sense at all to carry on eating them.

Which brings us to pitiful. It, too, means deserving of pity and carries that second meaning of scornfully small or poor. It's used, though, in a much more negative sense, giving rise to feelings of contempt rather than compassion:

They are asking what is this pitiful circus financed with millions of their tax dollars.

Maine Gubernatorial Coverage: Sloppy, Pointless, Pitiful

Union chief endorses 'pitiful' bonus deal for Palm Beach County

If you want to say, then, that something deserves pity, pitiable is your best choice. If you're looking for a more poetic phrasing, go with piteous. A contemptuous meaning wants pitiful. And if you're all out of pity, go with pitiless.

If something's piteous, it makes you feel pity and concern. The piteous cries of the orphaned kittens under your porch might convince you to climb under there and gather them up so you could feed them. Continue reading...

Pitiable describes something that's pathetic or miserable. After learning about the pitiable conditions of schools in parts of rural India, you might decide to donate supplies to them. Continue reading...

Pitiful means pathetic. If you don't even study for your test, you're making a pretty pitiful effort to do well. Continue reading...

Pitiless means "without mercy" or "cruel." Movie critics are often described as pitiless, because if they hate a film, they don't hold back or consider the feelings of the people who poured their hearts into making it. Continue reading...



pore/
pour


  A pore is small opening in a surface that lets stuff through. To pour, on the other hand,  means to flow continuously and rapidly.


  A pore is a little hole in a surface  that lets gases, liquids, and microscopic elements through. The surface might  be your skin (think of all those clogged pores suffered through in teen years)  or something else, like a filter:


      With  the sweat starting from every pore he essayed a few more steps,  stumbled, and in clumsily catching his balance, his hat fell off. (James Beardsley)

Solid  bodies are not absolutely so, all undoubtedly containing pores, or spaces  void of matter. (Thomas P. Jones)

As  a verb, to pore is used  with through or over and means that you are absorbed in the study  of something or that you are reading something intensely. For example:


      He spent more than 10 hours on the manuscript, poring over the details and asking faculty members for advice. (Nature)


      Meanwhile, players pore over Polaroid  photographs during breaks or wait as officials measure out first downs using  sticks attached to chains. (New York  Times)


  On the other hand, to pour is to flow, like  when you pour yourself a glass of water while it pours down rain.Usually an  inanimate object is poured, but  people can pour, too:


      The donations began pouring in on  Thursday, many of them delivered electronically and accompanied by politically  tinged comments. (New York Times)


      Within seconds, other heavily armed cops are pouring out the car, guns drawn, to surround the now disabled jet. (Time)


      So her group and others are pouring energy into  training mounted riders to fend off wolves. (New York Times)


  After  you pore over the difference between  these words, pour yourself a glass of lemonade and say, "This one's for U!"

That trickle of sweat didn't just miraculously appear — it was secreted out of a pore, a really tiny opening on the surface of your skin. Continue reading...

To pour is to flow rapidly in a steady stream, or to cause something to flow. You can pour good coffee into a cup and pour bad coffee down the drain. Continue reading...



practical/
practicable

Choosing between practical ("sensible") and practicable ("possible") often depends on context.


    Luxury gifts are  out this Christmas –  with practical/practicable  presents now topping most people's wish lists.


    Health Amendment  Act 2007 required councils to take all practical/practicable steps to ensure drinking  water complied with drinking water standards.


    The Torah contains  613 commandments, many of which we call ritual because they don't fulfill a practical/practicable or moral purpose.


In  the first sentence, the presents on people's wish lists are sensible or  reasonable. They're practical. Here's  another example: 


    The problem  with personal budgets is practical, not ideological.


The  second sentence refers to steps that can actually be put into practice, steps  that are achievable. They're practicable:



    He failed to take  all practicable steps to ensure his actions did not cause harm to any other persons.


‎The third quiz sentence  talks about three types of commandments: those concerned with religious ceremonies  (ritual), those concerned with a sense of right and wrong (moral), and those  concerned with things able to be put to use. That last group was labeled practical in the original sentence. But  if those commandments, such as returning lost objects, are ones that we can put  into use, aren't they also practicable, commandments  that are feasible? In a word: sometimes. Context can be everything.


When  faced with a choice between practical and practicable, look at the context  around the word. Do you mean to say that a thing is sensible? Choose practical. Do you want to say it is  possible? Choose practicable. Out of  context, sometimes either word will do.

Something that is practicable is something that can be reasonably done. Look at the word within the word, practice, plus the suffix -able, and you have something that is able to be put into practice, or practicable. Continue reading...

A stapler is a practical object — it has a use. A hand-crocheted stapler cozy designed to keep a stapler warm at night? Not practical at all. Continue reading...



pragmatic/
dogmatic

If you're pragmatic, you're practical. You're living in the real world, wearing comfortable shoes. If you're dogmatic, you follow the rules. You're living in the world you want, and acting a little stuck up about it.

Pragmatic people have their feet on the ground and their heads there, too. No time for dreaming! They're realistic. A pragmatic approach to something is the sensible one. A pragmaticway to fix a bike is to use the tools you have rather than the ones you wish you had. Examples:

"The academic and political atmosphere in the 1990s was decidedly pragmatic, rather than optimistic." (The Guardian)

"Clinton, meanwhile, focuses on the pragmatic instead of the aspirational, using her experience as a guide to what can get done." (Salon)

"Shoes were thick-soled, while bags were pragmatic large backpacks." (US News)

Dogmatic people are very firm their convictions, which usually come from some authority. The authority is often religious, but it doesn't have to be. Anything dogmatic is by the book. If you're dogmatic, you're 100% sure of your system despite evidence to the contrary. Dogmatic can also mean close-minded. Check it out:

"That is, if they can get past the dogmatic denial of man-made climate change." (Washington Times)

"We need more such balanced analyses, and fewer dogmatic opinions, on both sides." (Nature)

"When I became a cardiologist 30 years ago, I was pretty dogmatic about the low-fat, low-cholesterol diet to prevent heart disease." (Washington Post)

Pragmatic people know what time it is. Dogmatic people tell you what time it should be.

To be dogmatic is to follow a set of rules no matter what. The rules might be religious, philosophical, or made-up, but dogmatic people would never waver in their beliefs so don’t even think of trying to change their minds. Continue reading...

To describe a person or a solution that takes a realistic approach, consider the adjective pragmatic. The four-year-old who wants a unicorn for her birthday isn't being very pragmatic. Continue reading...



precede/
proceed


  Choose  the correct word:


      Deadly Skills Days Precede/Proceed the Deadly Days Festival


      CO2 regulation to precede/proceed in U.S. without climate bill


  These two words have similar sounds. They also have similar definitions, encompassing an  idea of forward movement. This leads to some confusion. Precede is to go before. Proceed means to move ahead, to continue.


  Our  first sentence, then, calls for precede, because the skills day will come before the festival. In the second sentence, proceed is the right choice; CO2  regulation will happen even though there's no overarching climate bill. 


  This  is one of those cases when knowing your prefixes can help you choose the right  word. The two words share a root, cede, which comes from the Latin cedere, which originally meant to go. With precede, the prefix pre- means before.So precede is to go before. In proceed, the  prefix pro- means forward, and  therefore proceed is to go forward.


  Sometimes  writers will also confuse the terms by misspelling precede as preceed:


      The event will preceed the men's soccer exhibition  match against UNC Chapel Hill.


      Preceed your website development with a proper graphics design.


  Here,  it's just a matter of memorizing the spellings: precede and proceed.

To precede is to come before. A short speech will precede the dinner. As you walk down the garden path, the bed of roses precedes the holly bush. When marching into the room, the younger kids precede the older ones. Continue reading...

To proceed means to go or continue forward. But somehow "ready, set, proceed!" doesn't quite have the same ring to it. Continue reading...



precedent/
president


      How  has the United States affected this word pair, precedent and president? Let's find out.


Precedent refers to  something that went before; it precedes something or serves as an example:


        This may be a dangerous precedent that facilitates and enables  dozens and potentially hundreds of unethical fathers to solicit money for their  sons in a pay-for-play manner.


        The decision sets up a precedent for other cases, which means  it's possible that the ruling will be taken to the US Supreme Court.


        There is no precedent for what Manny Pacquiao has now done, winning  eight titles in eight weight classes.


President refers to the  leader of an organization, the chief presider. It was first used to mean the  executive leader of a republic in 1787 in the American colonies and is used in  that manner in the U.S. Constitution: 


      The president of Fresno State University's student body acknowledged  publicly that he is an illegal immigrant.


        Eric Rosengren, the president of the Boston Federal Reserve Bank  said Wednesday that he doubted the economy was about take off.


        President Obama's planned meeting for Thursday with top Congressional  leadership has been postponed until Nov. 30.


      So  you could say America set a precedent by creating the role of president within a republic.

A precedent is something that sets a standard for future events. It's hard to say what the legal community would do without the word precedent, since so many legal judgments and decisions are based on what came before. Continue reading...

The president is the person officially in charge — whether it’s of a republic, a company, a college, or a fan club. Continue reading...



predominate/
predominant


  If  you win an election by a 3:1 margin, are you the predominant winner or the predominate winner?


Predominate is a verb meaning  to prevail, to have greater importance or quantity. You can easily see the root  word: dominate, to command over. Its  history is uncertain, but it was probably borrowed from Medieval Latin's predominare.


      Queens and Staten Island, where single-family homes  predominate, actually saw their first upticks in years.

 Tomorrow and the day after tomorrow, winds from westerly  directions predominate.


      They gave an insight into the ethos that predominates at top  English clubs.


Predominant is a derivative  of predominate and, by extension, dominate. Predominant, however, is an adjective describing something or  someone with the greatest importance, influence, or power. It can also be used  to describe something that is most common.


      The fancy shovels that didn't really cost that much were an  example of the predominant theme of Monday's ceremony.


      Just as in years past, steel was the predominant material at  this year's NAHBS.


      Such direct calls for regime change may not represent the  predominant public opinion in Syria.


  The  trick is not to use predominate as an  adjective, as some less-observant language users are wont to do. It's often  labeled as a needless variant by usage manuals and dictionaries. Garner's Modern American Usage notes  that the usage of predominate as an  adjective is at stage 3 of language change: "the form is commonplace even among  many well-educated people but is still avoided in careful usage." Your best bet  is to reserve predominate as a verb  and predominant as an adjective.

If you’re talking about the most popular or common thing, call it predominant. If the predominant feeling in a neighborhood is that pizza is the best food, the result might be pizzerias being the predominant type of restaurant there. Continue reading...

Of all the social networks, one predominates. Facebook is by far the biggest and most influential. When someone or something predominates, it's the largest or most powerful of all. Continue reading...



premier/
premiere


  Choose  your words:


    Avon: Building The World's Premier/Premiere Company For  Women


    Namely, RJ has a choice to make, hence the season two premier/premiere  title, "RJ's Choice."


  In  the first sentence, Avon is being described as the chief, or perhaps the  earliest, company for women. The correct choice is premier. It entered English in 1448 from the Middle French premier, for first or chief, which comes  from the Latin prīmarīus. A premier can also refer to a prime  minister.


    Premier Kathy Dunderdale says Danny Williams did not bring  any concerns to her directly.


    The first fruits of Bay of Plenty's premier rugby status are  about to be harvested.


  The  second sentence discusses the first episode of a TV show's second season. This  time we want premiere, meaning first  public performance. This is also a borrowing from French, in this case from première in première representation, in 1889. This première is the feminine form of premier.


    It makes it even more surprising a zero-budget production  about the wall-crawling superhero was able to premiere first.


    The Mainstage Season season will begin with the New York  premiere of Itamar Moses' Completeness.


Premiere was first used as  a verb, as in to have a first public performance, in 1940. It took several  decades before critics allowed premiere to be used that way, but the usage is now considered standard.

Premier is another way of saying “first” or “best” like the premier  ice cream store on the block that always has a line snaking around the corner. In a political sense a premier is a head of state. Continue reading...

A premiere is the first showing of a work of art. A movie premiere often takes place in Los Angeles or New York, with stars in attendance and the iconic red carpet rolled out to greet them. Continue reading...



prescribe/
proscribe

Warning! These similar sounding words have very different meanings. To prescribe is to recommend and to proscribe is to forbid. One little letter makes a big difference.

Prescribe is the more common word, and it's often used at the doctor's office. When a doctor jots down a prescription, she prescribes a drug to heal the patient. To prescribe also means to recommend something in an official way. Here are some examples of the word used correctly:

"If physicians want to help their patients, they need to prescribe affordable versions of accepted medical interventions." (Forbes)

"We are not centralist to the point where we prescribe what they spend on player wages, transfer fees." (Washington Times)

Leave proscribe to the pros. Proscribe is a rare and more formal word, meaning to forbid something or to demand a stop to it. It's often used in the phrase "a proscribed organization," such as a terrorist group that an official has demanded an end to. Here are some other examples:

"In contrast, laws in some European nations proscribe and even criminalize various forms of 'hate speech.'" (Reuters)

"The Constitution proscribes government discrimination on the basis of race, and state-provided education is no exception." (Washington Post)

If you're tempted to get them mixed up, think of the "e" in "prescribe for me," and the "o" in "Oh no, don't for proscribe."

To prescribe is make orders or give directions for something to be done. These days, the word is mainly used by doctors who prescribe medications to take. Continue reading...

To proscribe something is to forbid or prohibit it, as a school principal might proscribe the use of cell phones in class. Continue reading...



pretentious/
portentous

Fake mobsters in suits and spats are pretentious. But a horse head in your bed? That's portentous. And also, call the police.

A regular person who insists on using the royal "we" is pretentious. Find the word "pretend" in pretentious and you're onto something — both words come from the same Latin root. Pretending is fun, but anything pretentious is a bummer because it's fanciful and untrue. Examples:

"Eva's colleagues eventually turn on her and deem her uppity and pretentious; one day, someone in the office steals the diary." (The New Yorker)

"Well, the film was a bore, with far too many pretentious slow-motion surfing shots or close-ups of foam and bubbles." (Los Angeles Times)

Portentous  is darker. The word comes from the Latin portentosus for "marvelous, threatening," oh, and also "monster." A funnel cloud, a horse head, or a letter from an ex, are all portentoussigns. It overlaps with pretentious because portentous also describes someone trying hard to seem important, like a human pufferfish. But it's usually a sign of things to come, like a portent, or omen. Observe:

"But above them all looms one legendary beast: the great white whale, Moby-Dick, freighted with portentous doom." (The Guardian)

"Some are table-centered domestic scenes: silent intimacies, fights over a portentous envelope." (The New Yorker)

If you get them mixed up, remember that pretentious has an "i" at the end, and portentous has an "o" for "omen."

The black crows slowly circling the front entrance to your office building at 6:00 am may have a portentous quality, meaning it seems like they’re an omen indicating something bad will happen. Continue reading...

Use the adjective pretentious as a way to criticize people who try to act like they are more important or knowledgeable than they really are. Continue reading...



principal/
principle

If offered a choice, would you rather have principles or principals?

A principle is a fundamental or general truth. It might also be the original (fundamental) source of something.

America's principles establish religious liberty as a fundamental right.

In principle refers to something in its fundamentals without all the details worked out:

After just one hearing, Arroyo's bill penalizing drunk driving and five other similar bills were approved "in principle" by the committee on transportation.

Principal, on the other hand, is the person with the highest authority in a group, such as a school principal or the principal investor in a company. It is also the original sum of money or assets invested or lent:

An Israeli high school principal has been summoned for a hearing by the country's Education Ministry.

Jan van Eck serves as a director and principal at the firm.

The FHA refinance plan for homeowners may allow for principal reductions and underwater refinancing opportunities for those who qualify.

If you remember that the principal is your pal, you'll be able to choose your words well.

In principle describes a basic idea. If your mother supports your travel plans in principle, she likes the idea of you getting out and seeing the world — though this could change when she sees the cost of the trip. Continue reading...

For an adjective that points to the main or most important thing, your best choice is principal. Is your principal goal for the summer to have fun or to earn some extra money? Continue reading...

A principle is a kind of rule, belief, or idea that guides you. You can also say a good, ethical person has a lot of principles. Continue reading...



prophecy/
prophesy


      One  letter separates prophecy from prophesy, and the close relationship is  derived from a shared word history.


      A prophecy is a prediction or an utterance  from a prophet inspired by his god. It entered English before 1200 with two  spellings: prophecie and prophesie. It was borrowed from the Old  French prophetie/prophecie/prophesie, which  originated in Late Latin and Greek.


          Some psychological professionals swear by the power of the  self-fulfilling prophecy.


          What are your thoughts on how Egypt relates to biblical  prophecy?


          To think that such a rodent has these abilities of prophecy!


      To prophesy is to predict something or  to utter something inspired by one's god. It pops up in English in about 1350  as prophecien and prophesien, coming through the Old  French prophecier. 


          But we want to know why you do not prophesy like other  prophets, especially on the political situation of Nigeria or at the beginning  of the year?


          I prophesy that the GOP will lie right through its teeth in  50 years and take credit for the "Affordable Health Care" law.


          "Ryan Seacrest will be mine someday," prophesied 17-year-old  Courtney Penry of Missouri City, Texas, when American Idol auditions touched  down in Austin.


  Until  1700, the noun and the verb were spelled the same. However, the differentiated  spelling may be disappearing already. Garner's  Modern American Usage notes that prophesy for prophecy is at stage 3 of  language change: it's common even among educated speakers and writers.

If a fortune teller made a prophecy that you were going to become a billionaire in your lifetime, you'd be pretty excited. A prophecy is a prediction, or a magical look into the future. Continue reading...

The word prophesy can mean to predict or reveal something that will happen in the future. Many people use astrology to prophesy, or predict, their future regarding misfortune, wealth, love, and relationships. Continue reading...



prostate/
prostrate


  Oh,  for the want of a letter! Prostate is a gland found in male mammals, but prostrate, with an r, means to lie face down. Get them mixed up  and you'll thoroughly confuse your doctor.


  A  prostate (no r)is a gland in front of the bladder of male mammals. You often hear  about men having enlarged prostates or prostate cancer:


      A longer index finger gives men a lower risk of prostate cancer. (Reuters) 


Prostatecancer begins in the walnut-sized prostate gland, an integral part of the male reproductive system. (Science Magazine)


      Until very recently, the American Cancer Society  also urged men to get tested in order to avoid being killed by prostate cancer. (Time)


  Add  that second "r" in there, and prostrate means to lie or bow down. You might prostrate yourself before royalty, or lie prostrate on the floor if you have the flu or if your best friend just died. Prostrate is to be flattened:


      I found myself prostrate, then crawling until my  glasses broke. (New York Times)


      When Lord Macartney came to China he refused to prostrate himself before the Emperor in  the ritual kowtow out of respect to his own monarch. (The Telegraph)


      See  the poor wretch, prostrate at the royal feet, imploring a little indulgence,  and promising what is utterly beyond his power. (Joseph Cross)

Men  might have prostate cancer, which has  nothing to do with what they ate, but  remember the r in prostrate stands for relax or lie down. 

The prostate gland is part of a man's reproductive system; it's located near his bladder and is about the size of a kiwi fruit. Prostate cancer, which is fairly common in men, is usually treatable if it is detected early. Continue reading...

The verb prostrate means to lie face-downward in submission or despair. More generally, it means to make helpless or defenseless. Illness, injury, grief, despair — any of these things can prostrate someone. Continue reading...



quote/
quotation


  If  you quote someone, do you create a quote or a quotation? To quote is to transcribe what someone said or wrote, crediting  that person:


      As a result, until yesterday, the Company had been quoted  only on the Pink Sheets.


      "She was kind of a rainbow," Sheri Potter said Wednesday,  quoting Kimmie's father, Cecil.


  A quotation is the transcription of  what someone said or wrote, crediting that person:


      A quotation attributed to Adolf Hitler that made its way  into a high school yearbook in Pennsylvania has left students, parents and  educators mortified.


  Yet  we also see quote used to mean quotation, and not just by  Johnny-Come-Lately quotation publishers like Quote of the Day, BrainyQuote, and  the Quotations Page:


      Twain is known for more notable quotes about more topics  than you can shake a stick at.


      It features the presidential seal in the center and quotes  from some of the leaders Obama admires most.


  Most  dictionaries allow that quote can  mean quotation, though some will  label such usage as informal. Given the prevalence of this usage in edited news  copy, don't worry overmuch about using quote to mean quotation ... unless, of  course, you're writing for someone who is very formal.

A quotation is the exact words of someone else. When you like what someone said, put their quotation in your writing. Continue reading...

If a journalist is interviewing you and you blurt out something inappropriate, you will have to ask her not to quote you on that. Sometimes the word quote is used as shorthand for quotation, a passage of speech or writing that’s repeated word for word. Continue reading...



rebut/
refute


To rebut is to try to prove something  isn't true, but to refute is to  actually prove it isn't. Getting them mixed up won't get you kicked out of the  debate club, but it's worth knowing the difference.


‎To rebut is more than just "to deny," it's a serious attempt to prove  something is false. If you rebut something,  you haven't necessarily won the argument; you've only presented your side of  it:


    A Jesuit priest has taken to YouTube and his blog to rebut arguments raised by British  physicist Stephen Hawking. (Catholic News  Service)


    Baldwin has used his Twitter account to rebut criticism. (Washington Post)


Refute means to disprove something  straight up. If you refute something,  you successfully win the argument:


    The hearing was unfortunately based on hearsay  evidence that we were not able to refute by cross-examining anyone. (Eagle Tribune)


    Daly refuted the report Monday, saying  that only one general manager had expressed concern. (New York Times)


So,  if you try to defeat an  accusation, you rebut it. You still need to butt in again, so you re-but, as in "But wait! I can still  prove it!" If you actually defeat  the accusation, you have refuted it. 

To rebut is to argue against something. If your parents say you're too young and irresponsible to drive, you can rebut their claim by ticking off examples of your responsibility. Continue reading...

The verb refute is to prove that something is wrong. When the kids you're babysitting swear they brushed their teeth, you can refute their claim by presenting the dry toothbrushes. Continue reading...



regrettably/
regretfully


Regrettably is used when something's a  bummer, but it's not necessarily your fault. Regretfully is when you're  full of regret, like if you decided to stay home and your friends saw your  crush at the dance.

Both  words have the same root: regret, meaning to feel sadness, repentance,  or disappointment, but they each have their own way of dealing with it. Regrettably describes something that deserves regret, and is used like the word "unfortunately." Regrettably is like bad luck, and it  often kicks off a sentence:


Regrettably, Mr. Gao and Dr. Liu's  imprisonment reflect the increased assaults on the rule of law and the  repression faced by human rights advocates in China. (Council for a Community of Democracies)


Regrettably, some consumer advocates have  joined in that chorus. (New York Times)


    "Regrettably,  few weapons in the history of warfare, once created, have gone unused," Lynn  said. (Forbes)


  But regretfully is more like a polite way  to say sadly, like if you must regretfully decline an invitation to the  garden party. Or if you're full of regret, like if you regretfully stayed in on Saturday night because you thought the  party would be boring. Regretfully can  begin a sentence, but it usually doesn't:

 "I am half sorry we spared him after all,"  Leonidas said regretfully. (Robert H.  Fuller)


    The  man looked down at his boy sadly, sorrowfully, regretfully. (Maurice Thompson)


  People  have confused them so often, by using regretfully as a sentence adverb  to mean unfortunately, that it's kind of okay to do it now. Both words look  behind them and wish something else had happened, but regrettably is when it's not your fault, and regretfully is when you're full of it. (Regret, that is.)

Regretful describes the feeling of being sorry for something you did — or didn't do — or something that happened. If you are regretful about how you treated your brother when you were little, you now wish you had been nicer. Continue reading...

Use the adverb regretfully to mean "with regret" — the sorrow you feel about something that has already happened. For example, little kids would regretfully turn over the candy bars they stole from the grocery store. Continue reading...

Regrettable describes things that make you feel sorry. Letting your sister borrow your own snow shovel became a regrettable decision the moment the big storm started. Continue reading...

The sentence adverb regrettably is good for expressing regret, or sorrow, about an unfortunate event. If you forgot that today, May 5th, is your brother's birthday, you might say, "Regrettably, I thought today was the fourth." Continue reading...



reluctant/
reticent

Consider this sentence:


          They may also be reticent about sharing bad news with you.


      Are  they reticent? Or are they reluctant? It's a subtle difference to be sure. But  is it worth preserving?


Reluctant means resisting,  unwilling. There's a strong negative connotation attached to it, as these  examples demonstrate:


          The US healthcare industry has been extremely reluctant to embrace  outsourcing firms.


          The subject lends itself to hyperbole both because of its urgency  and the imperative to draw reluctant readers.


          US websites are reluctant to remove extremist religious material  because of the First Amendment to the constitution protecting free speech.


      By  comparison, reticent means quiet,  restrained, unwilling to communicate. Despite the unwillingness component,  reticent imparts less of a negative feeling:


          They were reticent about their main concerns, and few wanted  to talk about how they voted.


          The mustache and beard deny us the opportunity to get too close  to the man, whose reticent gaze appears fixed to the floor.


          Korchagin, usually calm and reticent, spoke with a passion that  surprised Tsvetayev


Garner's Modern American Usage reports that reticent for reluctant is at stage 4 of language change: a nearly universal form  that only "linguistic stalwarts," those "die-hard snoots," object to. Those  snoots (syntax nudniks [pests] of our time) are people who love language, are  at ease with its nuances, and tend toward tradition, rejecting neologisms  without good cause.


      It's  up to you, then. If you're in favor of preserving the nuance between reluctant and reticent, then be proud to be a snoot!

If the adjective reluctant applies to you, it means that you are undergoing some inner struggle and are unwilling or unable to decide. Continue reading...

Reticent means either quiet or restrained. If you're reticent about your feelings, you like to keep them to yourself, and you're probably quiet in rowdy groups where everyone is talking over each other. Continue reading...



respectfully/
respectively


  If you  kiss the mob boss's ring, do it respectfully, or full of respect and admiration. But respectively means "in the order given," so if you have to kiss up to the  rest of the mob, make sure to shake hands and high five Jimmy Rags and Tommy  Two Face, respectively because Jimmy  prefers a handshake, but Tommy loves a good high five.

To  show respect is to show how you admire something or someone, to show deference  or obedience. Therefore, when you do something respectfully, you're  being polite because you do it full of respect:


    Mr. Ruck listened, as he always listened, respectfully. (Henry James)


    "So tonight, we are respectfully asking  the candidates to try to put aside the talking points," he says. (Time)


    The servants bowed respectfully, and  retired in silence. (Bernhard Severin Ingemann)


Respectively, on the other hand, means in a manner  that treats several things individually, one by one, in a sequence. It's a way  to keep lists parallel, and it rescues sentences from extra words:


    By  comparison, Mitalas said fellow Metro League schools Seattle Prep and Lakeside  had 70 and 40 turn out, respectively. (Seattle Times)

That's  easier to say than "Seattle Prep had a turn out of 70 and Lakeside had a turn  out of 40." Same goes for this quote from an obituary of actor Cliff Robertson:

His  TV performances in "Days of Wine and Roses" and "The Hustler," for example,  were filmed with Jack Lemmon and Paul Newman, respectively. (Washington Post)

Sign  your emails "respectfully yours" if  you're full of respect for the person you're writing to, and save respectively for singling things out.  The grammar mob appreciates your attention to these details. 

If you’re respectful, you show consideration and regard for someone or something. Be respectful of your neighbors and turn down your disco music when it gets late. Continue reading...

Respectfully describes words and actions that show honor and worth. When people behave respectfully toward one another, they are polite and take the other people's feelings into consideration. Continue reading...

When two people each have something of their own, it's their respective thing. In a boxing match, the opponents each start in their respective or individual corners. Continue reading...

Respectively is used to indicate order, like if you said "Michael Phelps and Michael Jordan excelled in swimming and basketball, respectively." Continue reading...



sac/
sack

Both are containers, but a sac is for plants and animals, and a sack is for a sandwich. So spiders put their eggs in a sac, and people put their groceries in a sack.

A sac is usually biological — attached to a living thing. At the end of E.B. White's, Charlotte's Web, Charlotte, the dying spider, says, "This is my egg sac, my magnum opus, my great work."

Sacs aren't just for spiders, though. Humans have them, too:

 "The identical twin girls shared an amniotic sac and placenta." (Washington Post)

"It damages air sacs and passages to the lungs, and can make breathing a struggle." (BBC)

Add a "k" to make sack and you've got yourself another name for a bag you can put your groceries in. You might have a sack of flour in your kitchen. Soldiers can also sack entire villages, as in raid them. People also sack quarterbacks and needless employees. Here are some examples:

"Within earshot, Meser, a 32-year-old farmer, sat on three sacks of rice with two cans of oil resting by his feet." (New York Times)

"Attitudes hardened after the sacking of Constantinople, the centre of the Orthodox empire, by Crusaders in 1204." (The Guardian)

"Every team that passed me, I was thinking how I'm going to sack their quarterback." (Salon)

They sound exactly the same, and they both contain something, but sac is more specific and rare than sack. You put your snack in a sack.

A sac is a hollow space or container. While any pocket or pouch can be called a sac, the word usually refers to a small enclosed space that occurs in nature, like a spider's egg sac or a squid's ink sac. Continue reading...

A sack is a bag. In some parts of the country, store clerks put your stuff in a sack, but in other parts the same stuff goes in a bag. Sack is also an exciting verb. Continue reading...



scrimp/
skimp


      These words are two sides of the same coin: ways to get more or to make something  go further. One side is about saving; the other is about spending less.


Scrimp is the saving  side of the coin. As an adjective, it means meager, scanty. To scrimp is to be sparing with or  thrifty; to save slowly and with difficulty.


        Many arts and physical education programs landed on the chopping  block, while schools often were forced to scrimp and improvise in bizarre ways.


        And the university has been scrimping even on bare necessities--like  vacuuming the floors.


Skimp, which most likely  derives from scrimp, is the  spending-less side of the coin. As an adjective, it also means meager or barely  enough. To skimp is to give barely  enough or to save by getting barely enough.


        One came out just last week showing that people who skimp on  sleep seem to have higher blood cholesterol than people who sleep more.


        Although this should be a standard part of everyone's holiday  preparation, too many people skimp on having time for themselves.


      Yet  the idiom is to scrimp and save. But,  then, idioms do not necessarily mean the same as the sum of their parts:


        But  many indigent parents still scrimp  and save just to send their children to school, hoping that their kids will have  shot at success. 


      The  difference between scrimp and skimp is slight, and if the news media  is any indication, even that is disappearing quickly.

When you scrimp, you get by on very little money. If you scrimp all year long in order to buy tickets to the Stanley Cup finals, you save every last penny to be able to go to those games. Continue reading...

The verb skimp refers to using a limited amount of something. When tomato prices are high, a cost-conscious restaurant might skimp on the amount of chopped tomatoes it puts on salads. Continue reading...



sensor/
censor/
censer

These words sound the same, but a sensor is a device, a censor is a person who cuts potentially offensive material from a text or broadcast, and a censer is a container for incense.

A sensor is a device that detects motion, light, smoke, or even speed. If you have a smoke detector in your home, you’re familiar with a sensor — the sensor in the smoke detector “senses” smoke and emits an alarm. (If you don’t have a smoke detector in your home, go get one!) Sensor is related to the word sensory.

We sense you might want some examples:

The architects also added a computer-generated lighting system to alter the mood with light sensors that track the changing weather, seasons and hours of the day. (New York Times)

The retina at the back of eye contains light sensors called cones. (BBC)

A censor might make sure all the “bad” words in a movie are bleeped out or cut scenes of violence from a novel being adapted for young readers. Censor is also a verb, so you might censor yourself when your parents want to know exactly what you said that made your grandmother so angry. Here are more examples:

The struggle over online speech in Russia has important ramifications because the internet companies have been seen as shields from government censors. (New York Times)

China has censored any mention of the event online. (Seattle Times)

Censer, the rarest of the three words, is a holder for incense used in a religious ritual. In the Catholic Church, a priest or an altar server swings a censer during a service; it looks kind of like a smoky small metal pot held by chains. Here are two examples:

Dried and crushed resins of all three plants smolder in a nearby censer, filling the air with heavenly smells of fruity freshness. (Reuters)

The air was stale without a swinging censer. (New York Times)

Because these words sound alike, you may simply have to memorize their distinct spellings. Remember, a sensor senses, a censor cuts offensive material, and a censer holds incense.

 Continue reading...

A censor takes out things that are objectionable or inappropriate, like the censors at the TV networks bleeping out all the bad words in a show. Continue reading...

An electronic device that measures changes in a physical quality (like light or temperature) is a sensor. Your kitchen smoke alarm has a sensor that detects the smoky evidence of your badly burned toast. Continue reading...



sensual/
sensuous


      The  words sensual and sensuous are often used  interchangeably, but careful writers would do well to think before using one or  the other.


      The  terms share the root sens-, which  means to arouse the senses. Sensual has referred to gratifying carnal, especially sexual, senses since before 1425. Sensuous is believed to have been  created by John Milton in 1641 to mean relating to the senses instead of the  intellect without the sexual connotation. Let's look at some examples that use  our pair strictly:


          Designer Zac Posen sent out sensual cancan girls straight out  of a vintage Paris revue.


          Every once in awhile Pauline will recreate one of the sensuous  feasts she and Luciano used to serve to guests seated around a shared table.


      Today,  though, many writers will use the words interchangeably:


          Heat  and dust Delhi's sensual overload tests tourists, athletes 


          The way she gazes  into his face, we are privileged to get a glimpse of a subtle and sensuous erotica.


      It's  a shame to lose these shades of meaning. When you use sensuous, do you mean to include sexual undertones? Are those  undertones absent when you use sensual?  Your readers will only know if you choose your words wisely.

Sensual means physically pleasing. It often is used in a sexual context, but is not exclusively sexual in meaning. Continue reading...

Anything that is pleasing to the senses can be called sensuous. The feel of a soft cashmere sweater on your skin, the taste of dark chocolate, even the smell of your favorite person — all of these can be sensuous experiences. Continue reading...



simple/
simplistic


Simple has a rich  etymology and has kept most of its meanings throughout the centuries. It began  life in the early 1200s as meaning humble or ignorant:


          They were simple, ignorant, harmless children of Nature; with no knowledge of soul,  mind, God or heaven.


      By  the late 1200s, simple also meant  low-ranking:


          This language, in  spite of the complex influences which went to the making of the nationality of France,  was of a simple origin. 


      About  1300, it had add pure to its list of meanings, and in the early 1400s, it also  meant made of just one thing, the opposite of composite. By 1550, simple could also be used to mean not complicated.


      Sometime  during all this, simple was also used  as a noun to mean a plant or an herb used for medicine. To simple was to collect such a plant, and a simplist was someone who did the collecting. If a given plant had simplistic virtues, it had the virtues  of a simple. If your cousin had simplistic talents, she was good at making use of simples.


      The  medicinal simple has long since  disappeared from everyday English, but simplistic has survived. By 1881, it had  come into its modern meaning of trying to explain something complicated as  being simpler than it is; that is, oversimplifying:


          Joe Ollinger offers simplistic answers to the complex issues  we face.


          What  simplistic does not mean, however, is simple or easy:


          The game offers simplistic controls for the entire family to  enjoy.


      Don't  be fooled by salesmen pitching simplistic products. Unless he's selling medieval medicine, he's probably too simple  to know what he is selling.

Simple refers to something that's easy and uncomplicated, without too many steps to follow. Continue reading...

It would be simplistic to say that people who get good grades study more. This answer doesn't account for the complexities of how we learn and are tested. When something is simplistic, it is overly simple. Continue reading...



slight/
sleight

Slight is usually an adjective that describes things that are small, flimsy, or insignificant, like a slight drop in the temperature. If a book critic refers to a novel as slight, she could mean either that it’s short or that it’s trivial in its concerns. As a noun, slight means “a snub or insult,” and you can also use this word as a verb when someone does the snubbing or insulting. Check it out:

Repeatedly throughout his career, Jordan used slights against his greatness as motivation to obliterate all before him.  (The Guardian)

I feel slighted by their thoughtlessness and irritated that he doesn’t seem to care. (Slate)

The show contains a slew of card tricks, but the real sleight of hand is the transformation of digital into theatrical space. (Los Angeles Times)

The noun sleight refers to being able to use your hands with ease, especially when doing a trick. Sleight is often used in the phrase "sleight of hand." If you are a good magician, you can make a coin disappear with sleight of hand. Continue reading...

Anything slight is very small. There's a slight chance you'll run into a celebrity in New York City — in other words, don't count on it. A slight is also an insult, like giving someone the cold shoulder. Burr. Continue reading...



stationary/
stationery

Make sure you're stationary,  or still, while you jot down a love letter on your fancy stationery, so the writing isn't all squiggly. 

Why do these words sound so similar? They're kissing  cousins.They  both come from the  Latin stationarius, meaning "a seller in a fixed location." Our modern stationary means still, unmovable, like bad weather that lingers or a parked car:


    A disturbance in the southwestern Caribbean is  expected to remain stationary for the  next few days, the National Hurricane Center said. (Sun Sentinel)


    Police confirmed an incident at 6.50pm on Sunday,  October 17, when a blue Rover collided with a stationary vehicle. (Chesterfield  Post)


Stationery (with an "e")  also comes from stationarius,  but not as directly. According to the Online Etymology Dictionary, "Roving peddlers were more common in the  Middle Ages; sellers with a fixed location were often bookshops licensed by  universities," thus the connection between paper and staying still. Today, stationery is writing paper, the kind  you put resumes and wedding invitations on:


    People sent me Hallmark cards, handwritten notes on  lined paper, typed letters on formal stationery, even telegrams. (Time Magazine)


    Ms. Staller is the owner of Rosetta Papers, which  offers a wide variety of customized invitations, stationery, holiday cards and announcements. (ad for Rosetta  Papers)


  An easy  way to keep stationary and stationery straight is to connect the er in stationery to the paper it's made from.

Stationary means not moving. A stationary bike is the kind you find in the gym –– you pedal and pedal, but you just don’t go anywhere. Continue reading...

If your grandmother gives you a set of stationery as a birthday present, it might be a subtle hint to write her a thank you note. Stationery is a set of writing paper that comes with envelopes. Continue reading...



statue/
statute


  Look  under the pigeons and you might find a bronze statue in a park, but there's probably a statute, or law, about how big it can be. 

A statue is a figure of a person, animal, or object that is carved or cast  from some material, such as marble or iron. A statue is usually  life-sized or larger. (If it's smaller than the real-life original, it's a statuette or a figurine). Here are some examples of statue in the headlines:


    Bronze statue unveiled in tribute to Ronnie Barker (Mirror  UK)


    Rosa Parks statue dedicated in downtown Grand Rapids (Michigan  Live)


  But  a statute is a written law, such as that of a particular government or  organization:


    Fifteen  other states and the District of Columbia have since enacted similar statutes,  though cannabis remains classified as an illegal narcotic under U.S. law. (Reuters)

All  were also discharged within the past six years, putting them within the statute of limitations. (New York Times)

Both  words come from the Latin word "to stand," but a statue literally stands, often on two legs, and a statute is a law that stands. So while  you might find a statue in the park  of, say, Jimi Hendrix, it's the statutes about that park that allow a monument to the rock star to be erected there.

To stand as still as a statue is to stand absolutely still, a statue being a sculpture, after all. A statue is a specific kind of sculpture, one that clearly represents a person, an animal, or other living creature. Continue reading...

A statute is a formal law or rule. Whether it's enacted by a government, company, or other organization, a statute is typically written down. Continue reading...



than/
then

Than compares things, but then is all about time. They sound similar and were even spelled the same until the 1700s. Not anymore! Vive la difference!

Than shows comparison and has words on either side. A giraffe is bigger than a weasel. A pickle tastes better than a shoe. Than shows up in familiar sayings:

It's better to give than to receive.

Actions speak louder than words.

His bark is worse than his bite.

Problems arise when a pronoun follows than. Is it "She is taller than I"? Or "She is taller than me"? If you said "taller than  I," you are correct! Because of the understood verb — "She is taller than I (am)" — you use I not me. (If that sounds a little stuffy, don't worry. Over the years it's become okay to save "taller than I" for formal writing and use "taller than me" informally.)

Okay, then, let's talk about then. Then doesn't bother comparing anything, it just moves things along. Then can be used as in "next," or "at a particular time," or "in that case." It often comes after an "if" as in "If we write about cats, then we must write about dogs." And then there were examples:

She got up at 4 a.m. to practice, then went to school, then got back in the pool to practice some more. (Washington Post)

Moun was treated by prison medical staff, then taken to a hospital, where he was pronounced dead. (Los Angeles Times)

Getting these imports at a cheaper price, then, is good news. (US News)

There you have it. Than is higher in the alphabet than the word then. When making comparisons, than gets an A because it's more competitive. It's even first in the alphabet! Then has an "e" because it's n-e-xt.

Then is a word that puts things in order by time, or refers to a moment in time: you get up; then you have breakfast. You're married now; back then, you were single. Continue reading...



that/
which

The words that and which point to something — which one? That one! Before a clause or phrase, a that clause goes with the flow, but a which clause starts with a pause. American English makes a big deal out of the distinction but British English doesn't, which may be why it's so dang confusing.

There's no comma before that because the info that comes after is important. That restricts the meaning. For example, "Please grab the coat that makes her invisible" is not the same as "Please grab the coat." She needs to be invisible! Here are some examples, and read the rest of the nursery rhyme if you love thats:

"This is the house that Jack built." (Nursery Rhyme)

"You're the One That I Want." (Grease)

Which, on the other hand, is like, "oh, by the way." A which begins a nonrestrictive clause or phrase, meaning it doesn't restrict the meaning of the sentence and needs a comma. So if you say, "Please grab the coat, which she left on the floor," use which if it doesn't really matter where she left it. Just grab the coat already. Like the bad witch from the Wizard of Oz, words beginning with which are nearly expendable, like in these examples:

"So we do not need to step out of the house for days, which I am so looking forward to." (Oxford English Dictionary)

"Ed's house, which is located on thirteen acres, was completely furnished with bats in the rafters and mice in the kitchen." (Rules for Writers)

So if you use that, don't use a comma because it needs to flow with the rest of the sentence. But a which whispers in your ear and deserves a little pause, which is kind of cool.



their/
there/
they're

How do you comfort grammar snobs? Pat them on the back and say, their, there. You see, they're easily comforted, but you have to get it in writing because those words sound alike. Their shows possession (their car is on fire), there is a direction (there  is the burning car), and they're is short for "they are" (they're driving into the lake).

Their  is a possessive pronoun, so if Madonna and Cher own a car, it's their car. If Cher owns it by herself, it's hers. Back off, Madonna.Their is co-owned by the "e" and "i," and it breaks the "i" before "e" rule. Sometimes their is used instead of singular his or her, as in "Who blew their nose so loudly?" But that can be awkward.Their in the wild:

"Their Eyes Were Watching God" (novel by Zora Neal Hurston, 1937)

"The precocity of the group, the show, and their playwriting skills is not surprising, of course." (Huffington Post)

There, there , don't be discouraged. "Here" and there are directions -- there is "here" with a "t" because you have to go a little farther to get from here to there. "Here" and there can never be the subjects of a sentence, by the way. In the sentence, "There is Cher's car," there points to the subject, which is "car." Here are some there's from the world:

"Ten years ago, he went back there with an ex-girlfriend. (The Guardian)

"There may seem no obvious reason why not." (Time)

They're always means "they are," so if you can replace they're with "they are" then you've spelled it correctly. Woohoo! The apostrophe stands in for the missing "a." Replace "they are" for they're in these examples and see that it works!

"They're here!" (Poltergeist, 1982)

"They're Coming to Take Me Away" (song by Napoleon XIV, 1966)

If you get them mixed up, do a quick check: in your head, replace there with "here"; replace their with "our"; and they're with "they are." If it all makes sense, you got them right!



tortuous/
torturous


  Don't torture yourself trying to remember the  difference between tortuous and torturous. Tortuous describes something like the long and winding road. But torturous is what a room full of  masochists might say: "Torture us!" It describes something painful, like a poke  in the eye with a sharp stick.

Tortuous, pronounced  "TOR-choo-us," describes something that has many twists and turns, like a zigzagging road or the plot of a soap  opera. Here are some examples from the news,


    Path to peace in Middle East still tortuous as ever. (Morning Star)


    Let us walk with you down the tortuous road of this first year in college. (North by Northwestern)


    Fortunately, not all technology is on the side of  the companies that hide behind tortuous voicemail systems. (CNN Money)


  Add another "r" for torturous, pronounced  "TOR-cher-us," used to identify something that somehow involves  extreme pain or suffering (torture):


    Chance and Guererro stage a daring rescue of Winston  from the hands of his torturous kidnappers. (TV Guide)


    For the next two torturous hours, the Scarborough man was bound, beaten, robbed and left to wonder whether  his wife, children and tenants were dead or alive. (canoe.ca)


    He had survived homelessness, hunger and depression  in a torturous journey from the  Guatemalan highlands. (Washington Post)


Tortuous is descriptive, not judgmental –  driving on a road that's so long and crooked it makes you dizzy is tortuous, but you might like it. Torturous is definitely judgmental. If your friend in the passenger seat is white knuckled  and scared, she'd say the ride was torturous. 

Tortuous means twisting or complicated. "James Bond drove up a mountain road that was tortuous in its twists and turns. He had to stop the evil madman's plan for world domination, a plan so tortuous that even 007 himself could not understand it." Continue reading...

Torturous describes anything that involves terrible suffering. Visiting a veal farm and witnessing the torturous conditions the calves are kept in might convince you to become a vegetarian. Continue reading...



troop/
troupe

Troop and a troupe both rhyme with "group," but a troop is a group of soldiers or scouts, while a troupe is a group of performers. To keep these two homophones straight, just remember that troop has two “o”s like soldiers lining up in matching uniforms.

Attention! Spelled with two “o”s and no “e” on the end, troop refers to a squad of soldiers or scouts. A troop marches, fights, keeps order — or, in the case of the Girl Scouts, comes to your door selling cookies. Here are some troops marching in the news:

A troupe is any company of performers, such as dancers, mimes, or comics. Many troupes go on tour. Like dancing? Join a dance troupe! Enjoy making people laugh? Get on the comedy troupe tour bus! Here are some troupes in context:

 



turbid/
turgid


  Pop  quiz time! Choose the correct word in each sentence:


      The rivers become so turbid/turgid that they turn a  chocolate brown color.


      If the writing is turbid/turgid, the story and its  characters will not be clearly seen.


      I just took my shoes off at midnight and found that I have little,  turbid/turgid toes!


      Leo's turbid/turgid, overblown prose won over his professor  in the end.


  In  the first sentence, the rivers are so muddy, so opaque, that they are brown  (makes you favor the environmentalists, doesn't it?). Turbid is the right choice here. It can refer to something thick  with suspended matter, as with the rivers.


  The  second sentence refers to writing that is confused or opaque. Again, the  correct word is turbid. The rivers in  the first sentence were so muddy that you couldn't see to the bottom. The  writing referred to in the second sentence also prevents you from seeing to the  bottom.


  Confused  or opaque toes don't seem to work in the third sentence, so the answer must be turgid. Turgid means swollen or bombastic. One imagines the speaker of the  third sentence taking her oh-so-fashionable shoes off after a long evening out  and finding that her toes have become little sausages, thus the appropriateness  of turgid. 


  You've  probably figured out by now that the fourth sentence requires turgid as well. The prose in that  sentence is a different type of swollen, one hinted at with overblown. Here, the writing isn't  unclear but bombastic, pompous, full of itself, which describes a lot of  academic writing.


  To  recap:

If a liquid is dark and murky and you can't see through it, it's turbid.  It’s usually used as a criticism — a turbid river is generally a polluted one, but then again a good pint of real ale should be turbid. Go figure. Continue reading...

Turgid describes something that's swollen, typically by fluids, like a turgid water balloon that's way too big to resist dropping on your friend's head. Continue reading...



unconscionable/
unconscious


  These two words look and sound similar. In fact, if you think too hard about them  together, you might find your tongue tripping over them. 


  The  older unconscionable, dating back to  the 1560s, is the absence of reason or right; having no idea between right and  wrong:


      She said she finds WWE's simulated rape scenes "unconscionable.''


      It is unconscionable that the Obama Administration is gambling  with American lives.


      Attempting to fence them out of their home is unconscionable.


  Relative  newcomer unconscious originated in  1712, meaning unaware. In the 1860s, it picked up the meaning to lose  consciousness, to not be awake:


      Fidgeting and Doodling Could Be Unconscious Focus Tools


      Woman attacked and left unconscious under bridge in  Edinburgh


      Zsa Zsa Gabor is unconscious as she's been fitted with a feeding  tube in the hospital.


  Both  words descend from the Old French conscience (inner knowledge), which in turn comes from the Latin conscientia, which means both inner knowledge and a knowledge of  right and wrong.


  How  can you tell these cousins apart? Unconscionable's  opposite would be the obsolete conscionable,and it sometimes seems right behavior  is also obsolete in our society—just look at our example sentences! If that's  not the word you're after, it must be unconscious.

Something that is almost unimaginably unacceptable is unconscionable. Think of it as being something that no reasonable person would even think of doing or saying — something unbelievable, outrageous, and often horrible. Continue reading...

When you're unconscious you're passed out or asleep. Anything going on in the body that we're not aware of can also be called unconscious. Continue reading...



undo/
undue

You can undo something as simple as a buckle on a suitcase, a latch on a door, or thankfully, a wrong command on a computer. But undo can also be negative — to undo progress is to go backwards, and to undo another person is to upset them or make them fail. Here are some examples:

Countries that have beaten back the virus to low levels need to be especially vigilant for superspreading events, because they can easily undo hard-won gains. (Science Magazine)

If Cromwell’s intriguing against two women helps to make his fortune in the first two novels, it is his good deeds that help to undo him in the third. (Slate)

A coalition of state lawmakers stepped in, saying that the bag fee amounted to government overreach and that it would put an undue financial burden on poor New Yorkers. (New York Times)



unexceptional/
unexceptionable


  Pop  quiz time! Choose the correct word for each sentence:


    Ricky Gervais' clever touch is muted in this  unexceptional/unexceptionable film about young men navigating adulthood.


    Religious freedom in the U.S. Constitution is  unexceptional/unexceptionable. 


    The judge's ruling was unexceptional/unexceptionable.


  The  first sentence discusses a film that was ho-hum, nothing exciting, nothing to  write home about. Choose unexceptional, and you'll be saying it's plain or ordinary.


  The  second sentence states that in the U.S., we have religious freedom, period.  There are no exceptions, no loopholes. The proper word choice, then, is unexceptionable, meaning without  exception or objections.


  But  what about the third sentence? Was the judge's ruling ordinary or without  objections?


  Interestingly,  both Merriam-Webster Unabridged and Oxford  Dictionaries Online say that  either answer could mean one of two things. MWU gives a second definition of unexceptional as "allowing no exception;  unalterable." If you choose unexceptional, then, MWU would allow for either meaning. ODO, on the other hand, notes that unexceptionable can mean "ordinary." It  would allow you to use unexceptionable for either meaning. 


  Clearly,  past writers have confused the meanings of unexceptional and unexceptionable to an extent that  meanings are expanding. What's a  careful writer to do? To write and speak clearly, we must choose our words with  care and be certain our audience understands us. Reserve unexceptional to mean ordinary and unexceptionable to mean without exception or objection.

If something is unexceptionable, don't bother trying to find something wrong with it — you won't. Your unexceptionable character makes you the perfect candidate to run for public office, but if you run, people will be looking for things to criticize. Continue reading...

Unexceptional describes something that's perfectly ordinary, like your unexceptional day that's not good or bad — or memorable for any reason. Continue reading...



venal/
venial


  Catholics everywhere are confused: do they commit venal sins or venial sins? And what is a venal/venial sin anyway? Whether they're  Catholic or not, many writers are just as confused:


      Elshtain's Alleged Venal Sins


      Drinkin', cheatin', killin', temptation,  greed and other mortal and venial sins.


      Politicians couldn't possibly be as  venal, as stupid, as irresponsible or as heartless as portrayed in the  30-second spot.


      That Republicans would value this crass,  conniving, venial, vapid airhead [Sarah Palin] indicates the direction that the  Republican party is headed.


Venial means minor in  the circumstances; when speaking specifically of sins, it's a slight sin, such  as occasionally getting drunk or giving in to small temptations. (Most would  agree that killing at least comes under the "mortal" heading.) Political  scientist Jean Bethke Elshtain might be guilty of a venial sin according to the author, but not a venal one. 


Venal means  corruptible, able to be bribed. Politicians are often described as venal. Adolf Hitler, Fidel Castro, and  Saddam Hussein certainly wear that label. Whether Sarah Palin does could be a  great conversation starter, as long as you don't mind if it comes to blows. But  no one will say she's of slight consequence. Her ability to grab headlines  proves that. The last example wants venal, not venial.

Someone with venal motives is corrupt and maybe a little evil. Nobody wants to be thought of as venal. Continue reading...

Some crimes are unforgivable. Others are venial — venial crimes and sins are excusable. They're not a big deal. Continue reading...



veracious/
voracious

Voracious describes someone super hungry, like a zombie or a wolf. A voracious appetite makes you want to eat a whole cake. Veracious (with an "e") means truthful, as in a veracious first president who cannot tell a lie.

Voracious is spelled with an "o" for an open mouth or the hole in your stomach you're trying to fill if you have a voracious appetite. It's used to describe appetites, but not always for food — a voracious reader devours books by reading one after the other. Here are some unrelenting examples:

The fish are such voracious eaters that they have crowded out other species and disrupted ecosystems. — Wall Street Journal

A voracious reader, he became a self-educated art historian and a well-informed generalist whose knowledge awed his friends, including well-known artists. — New York Times

The more formal word veracious comes from the Latin root verus for "truth." You might recognize that root in words like verify "to show something's true," or verisimilitude for "seeming true to life." Veracious means truthful, so a veracious author, for example, is one who tells the truth. Here are more examples:

This interesting, although not very veracious author, gives the following account of the process. — J.G. Millingen

I ought to have bought up all sorts of memories, and written the most veracious novel the world has seen. — Israel Zangwill

If you had to hang out with either a voracious person or a veracious one, choose the veracious, or truthful, one. The voracious one would definitely eat all of your French fries, and your brains if you hang out with zombies.

Someone who is veracious speaks the truth — like your brutally honest friend who always lets you know what she thinks about your outfits, your hairstyle, your lasagna recipe, and your taste in movies. Continue reading...

Veracity sounds like some kind of disease you don't want to catch, but in fact, it means truthfulness. If you question the veracity of a statement or story, you wonder whether it is truthful or accurate. Continue reading...

Voracious is an adjective used to describe a wolflike appetite. It might be a craving for food or for something else, such as power, but the word usually denotes an unflattering greediness. Continue reading...

Use the noun voracity when you're describing someone's enormous, gluttonous appetite. Continue reading...



wave/
waive

To wave is to move to and fro, like when you wave your hand. Hello there! To waive, with a sneaky "i," is to give up your right to do something.

Waves come in many forms. You can wave your hand, a hanky, or even a baseball hat to say hello or acknowledge someone, as in this example:

Fans around the green gave him a standing ovation, and Guan waved his baseball cap in acknowledgment.

A wave is also that big moving hill of water you can surf on:

Surfing students exercise on their boards before hitting the waves.

Other things are called waves, too — if a lot of people come in somewhere, for example, call it a wave of people. It's often used as a metaphor for things that act like ocean waves:

Maybe the great wave of social change has simply crested.

To waive, on the other hand, is to surrender, as in give up your rights to something. If you go scuba diving at a resort, you might have to waive your right to sue if something goes wrong. Here are some examples:

It also announced a mandatory arbitration clause, forcing users to waive their rights to participate in a class action lawsuit except under very limited circumstances.

Meanwhile, following budget cuts, the LOC board members have waived their salaries.

Waive is always a transitive verb, so you have to waive something. The other kind of wave doesn't need an object — although you can wave your hat, you don't have to. You can just wave. If you waive your salary, even for a good cause, you can wave goodbye to your money!

To waive is to give up one's right to do something. If you waive your right to help name your family's new puppy, you can't complain if he ends up being called "Mr. Tinkerbell Sweetheart Lovey-Face." Continue reading...

The word wave has many different meanings, but they all have to do with an undulating motion or shape. A wave that washes up on a beach has the same kind of back-and-forth movement as a crowd of baseball fans doing "the wave" in the stands. Continue reading...



weather/
whether/
wether

The weather outside is partly cloudy whether you like it that way or not. A wether, on the other hand, is a castrated sheep. You read that right.

Weather  comes from the Old English weder, for basically, "air and sky." It used to refer to storms, but now the weather can be sunny, too. Ships that weather a storm get through it, just like people who weather something. Examples:

"Given the odd weather of late, you may be aware that we are in the midst of what could be a record-setting El Niño." (Washington Post)

"If you enter the theater of this novel, get set to weather some disorientation as soon as the lights dim." (Washington Post)

The word whether indicates a choice. You can decide whether to go to the movies. The "or not" isn't necessary because it's implied in the word whether. "Or not" can be added if it means, "regardless of whether," as in "We will play outside whether or not it snows." Here's Hamlet's famous choice:

"To be, or not to be? That is the question—
Whether 'tis nobler in the mind to suffer
	The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune,
	Or to take arms against a sea of troubles…"

Poor little wether. It's always jumping in for whether but wether is never a choice. It's always a sheep or a goat. The word pops up a lot, but these sentences actually get it right:

"He jumped up, and called to the shepherd— 'I say, old boy, let that bell wether of mine alone, will you?'" (Richard Cobbold)

"My shepherd's pipe can sound no deal, my wether's bell rings doleful knell." (William Henry Burr)

Weather refers to climate conditions and whether comes before a choice. As for wether, be careful. If you say "We're having great wether tonight," it might sound like you're serving castrated goat for dinner.

Weather is the atmospheric conditions, including the temperature, wind, snow, rain, or anything else happening outside. People tend to talk about the weather when they can't think of anything else to talk about. Continue reading...

A wether is a ram or billy goat that was castrated at a young age. Wethers can be housed with the female sheep or goats, but intact bucks and rams usually are kept separately. Continue reading...



who/
whom

To Whom It May Concern: who is a subject and whom is an object. Who acts and whom receives. Say what? Who is like "he" or "she" and whom is like "him" or "her." Who is collecting money for homeless kittens? He is! Then to whom does the money go? Send the money to him.

Who  often begins a question: "Who do you think you are?" Unlike whom, who can be a subject, as in "Who went to dinner?" The problem with who or whom usually lies with whom, so let's look at a few examples:

"Who Are You" (album by The Who, 1978)

"Who was that masked man?" (Lone Ranger, 1930s TV show)

Whom  is the confusing one. Like many objects, it often comes after a preposition (to, by, from, over), as in that start to a business letter: To Whom  It May Concern. Also, "one of whom" is a popular phrase. Whom is like an ascot — kind of old fashioned but some people still rock it. Sticklers and Southerners tend to use whom, and it's lovely when used correctly. It's formal, so that's why it shows up in business letters. So pull up your Colonial breeches and look at these examples:

"For whom the bell tolls; it tolls for thee." (from a poem by John Donne, 1624)

"For Whom the Bell Tolls" (novel by Ernest Hemmingway, 1940)

"For Whom the Cowbell Tolls" (Mississippi State Bulldog online community, 2015)

It's downhill for whom! The bottom line is that if you can replace the who with "he" and it sounds right, then keep it. Who cares? He cares! If "him" works, go with whom. Whom did she marry? She married him. Since him sounds better, stick to whom, stickler.



who's/
whose

Knock knock. Who's there? It's an apostrophe telling you that who's is short for "who is." Whose silly idea was it to make these words sound alike? Who knows? But whose shows possession and who's is a contraction.

Who's confused? Not you! With an apostrophe, who's is always short for "who is" or "who has." Sure, apostrophes show possession, but they also replace letters in a contraction, especially with pronouns like "who" and "it." The apostrophe indicates the missing letter. When an apostrophe is used with a pronoun, it's (see there?) often a contraction, like the examples from these fairy tales:

"Who's Afraid of the Big Bad Wolf?" (Three Little Pigs)

"Who's been eating my porridge?" (Goldilocks and the Three Little Bears)

But whose is like "his" or "hers." It shows possession without an apostrophe because it's already a possessive pronoun. Possessive pronouns don't need no stinking apostrophes! Whose is the possessive form of "who" and "which." So, whose can refer back to ideas, where "of which" doesn't fit, as in "a question whose answer is required." Pretty stuffy. Here are better examples:

"Nothing is more powerful than an idea whose time has come." (Victor Hugo)

"Whose Line Is It Anyway?" (TV show)

If you forget, remember that who's is often a question — it has a little space waiting for an answer. That apostrophe stands for "is." Whose owns it all. It's possessive, like a kid who keeps all the toys close. The bottom line is that who's is short for "who is," and whose shows ownership.



wreck/
wreak/
reek

Wreak (rhymes with “squeak”) means to cause something terrible to happen. It’s commonly used in the phrase “wreak havoc.” Pair wreak with abstract nouns, like "devastation" or "mayhem," rather than with physical objects. Here are some examples:

 

It smells absolutely rotten and offensive. Birds are falling from the sky because of the fumes. You might throw up from one whiff. Whatever it is, it reeks. Continue reading...

To wreak is to cause something to happen, usually with a terrible consequence. You can make mischief, cause problems, or inflict pain, but to wreak damage suggests a deeper level of destruction. Continue reading...

A wreck is something that's been destroyed. Your hair might be a wreck after a bad day at the barber. Your car might be a wreck after you hit a telephone pole. Continue reading...



your/
you're

You're  is short for "you are" and your shows ownership. If you're getting them mixed up, your secret is safe with us. Better yet, here's help! It's your secret. And now you're about to know more. See?

"You're  a shining star" = "you are a shining star." You're is a contraction for "you are," and that apostrophe goes where the "a" fell out. When parents get mad, they say the whole thing: "You are not going anywhere, bud!" But when you're in love, like in these songs, you keep it simple:

"You're the one that I want, oo, oo, oooo, honey." (Grease)

"I guess you're just what I needed." (The Cars)

"You're so vain." (Carly Simon)

Your  is the possessive form of the second person pronoun, "you." Say that ten times fast. It's all about ownership with your. Without that apostrophe, the word your points or describes something that belongs to the person being spoken to, as in "your dirty socks." (Pick them up!) It's a key ingredient in "your mama" jokes and these two songs:

"Your  Cheating Heart." (Hank Williams)

"Your mama don't dance and your daddy don't rock and roll," (Loggins and Messina)

Although the old-fashioned word yore as in "the past" sounds just like those other two, it's less likely to pop up. You're goes before something you're (!) doing or being (you're falling into the lake) and your goes in front of something you own, like your leopard-print bathing suit.



